Network Impact of Post-Quantum Certificate Chain
sizes on Time to First Byte in TLS Deployments
Matthew Chou
1, Phuong Cao
1,2,∗
1University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2National Center for Supercomputing Applications
Abstract—Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) is a rapidly
growing deployment challenge as cryptographically relevant
quantum computers (CRQC) continue to advance, leaving tra-
ditional cryptographic algorithms used in X.509 vulnerable to
attack. However, PQC introduces significant deployment chal-
lenges in real-world networks, with handshake sizes increasing
from 5x to over 20x compared to classical algorithms. In this
work, we evaluate the time to first byte (TTFB) under CDN-
focused TLS conditions to characterize the latency cost of
transitioning existing internet infrastructure to quantum-safe
certificate schemes. We observe discrete increases in TTFB as
certificate chain sizes exceed transport layer data flight limits. To
isolate the impact of certificate chains, we evaluate both ECDSA
and ML-DSA-based certificate schemes, generating similarly
sized certificate chains through controlled addition of certificate
extensions. We additionally examine how CDN properties such as
session resumption, certificate size optimizations, and geographi-
cal distribution reduce latency penalties. To ground our findings
in real-world applications, we utilize Zeek-monitored TLS traffic
through a High-Performance Computing System (NCSA) with
terabyte network connectivity across the nation to quantify real-
world session resumption rates. We compare CDN-driven size
optimization with Merkle Tree Certificates (MTC) to examine
how size reductions allow certificate chains to remain under
the flight limit threshold. We find that MTC allows for 2x-
3x increase in supportable certificate chain size, whereas CDN-
based optimizations yield more limited reductions, supporting
up to approximately 1.6x certificate chain size increase. These
findings reveal a bandwidth-rooted bottleneck in PQC deploy-
ment latency, highlighting the critical importance of certificate
chain design and optimization strategies for achieving a practical
quantum-safe internet infrastructure.
Index Terms—Post-Quantum Certificates, Transport Layer
Security, Content Delivery Networks, Network Latency
I. INTRODUCTION
Cryptographically relevant quantum computers (CRQCs)
are expected to break real-world encryption schemes using
Shor’s algorithm, also known as Q-Day [1]. Although quantum
computers are still years away from being strong enough
to break modern encryption algorithms such as RSA, there
remains the threat of attackers who will harvest encrypted
data now to be decrypted later when quantum computers
become available. This motivates the development of Post-
Quantum Cryptography (PQC), i.e., algorithms resistant to
quantum computing [2]. The National Institute of Standards
and Technology is standardizing PQC and developing deploy-
able quantum-resistant algorithms for key exchange/encryption
and digital signatures [3].
*Corresponding author: Phuong Cao; Data: https://pmcao.github.io
This work evaluates how certificate chain length directly
affects TTFB, specifically using both traditional and Post-
Quantum-based certificate schemes and artificially inflating
their sizes to isolate the network-derived latency. We vary the
round-trip time (RTT), the number of intermediate certificates,
and the certificate size to further analyze the effects of end-to-
end delays. We observe that the dominant factor contributing
to TTFB is not propagation delay but rather bandwidth limi-
tations and implementation overhead. Our work also proposes
using CDN-specific behaviors as well as Merkle Tree Certifi-
cates (MTC) [4] to reduce RTT by keeping certificate chain
sizes within the flight capacity threshold.
However, while these algorithms do protect against quan-
tum adversaries, they have several drawbacks. PQC secures
data using mathematically complex problems, such as lattice
problems and high-dimensional algebra, thereby substantially
increasing the number of bits required for both keys and
certificates. Certificate sizes, in particular, increase substan-
tially, ranging from 5x to over 20x depending on the specific
scheme used [5], [6]. This negatively impacts Transport Layer
Security (TLS) handshakes as packets exceed the Maximum
Transmission Unit (MTU), leading to data fragmentation and
increased round-trip times (RTT). These directly affect the
time to first byte (TTFB), a user-facing performance metric
[7].
While the TLS protocol remains consistent across de-
ployment environments, higher latencies affect infrastructure
differently. Content Delivery Networks, which are built to
minimize latency by serving content from geographically
adjacent edge servers, represent a distinct case compared to
traditional non-CDN origin-based systems [8]. The increased
latency introduced by PQC would significantly affect CDN
infrastructure, as these latency-optimized environments handle
millions of connections where even small per-connection delay
increases can translate into substantial consequences at scale
[9].
There have been many studies evaluating PQC in TLS envi-
ronments on handshake latencies and PQC overhead [10], [11].
However, these works do not isolate the effect of certificate
chain sizes on TTFB, nor do they explicitly model transport
layer flight limits. We use data from the Zeek measurement
tool [12], [13] with NCSA’s database to analyze CDN-specific
properties such as session resumption rates, providing real-
world conditions for our experiments.
Results. Merkle Tree Certificates and CDN chain optimiza-
tions allow for certificate chain size increases by ∼2x-3x and
arXiv:2604.24869v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

up to ∼1.6x respectively while still keeping certificate chain
size within bandwidth control window thresholds. Moreover,
session resumption is able to keep certificates under bandwidth
limits, with CDNs saving 2x more time to first byte (TTFB)
than non-CDNs on average. Our data is grounded in real
results with us seeing ∼80%-90% Session Resumption rates
for CDNs. We additionally observed CDN session resumption
rates are proportinal to TLS 1.3 adoptions rates over our 16
month dataset.
Contributions. A summary of our main contributions is as
follows:
• Analysis of the effect of certificate chain size on TTFB
across both ECDSA and ML-DSA-based schemes, al-
lowing for direct evaluation of TLS latencies due to
propagation delay.
• Comparison of CDN impact on PQC including 1) geo-
graphical distribution, 2) certificate optimization, and 3)
session resumption.
• Evaluation of MTC and CDN optimizations as chain
size reduction techniques, comparing their effectiveness
in reducing overhead by enabling certificate chains to
remain within packet flight limits.
• Zeek-monitored TLS traffic of an NCSA to analyze real-
world session resumption behavior.
Putting this Paper in Perspective. Prior works have studied
handshake size on network latency for various PQC certifi-
cates. Numerous other works have analyzed CDN optimiza-
tions, implemented with real data. However, none of the
previous works have directly compared the time to first byte
(TTFB), while isolating certificate chain sizes across various
CDN and MTC optimizations.
II. BACKGROUND
This section provides background on modern web security
and post-quantum cryptography (PQC). It covers TLS fun-
damentals, post-quantum cryptography (PQC) basics, relevant
certificate types, and key CDN system features.
A. Transport Layer Security Overview
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a cryptographic protocol
designed to provide secure communication over digital net-
works. It is most commonly used to securely request and send
web traffic through HTTPS and builds a foundation for modern
Internet security. TLS ensures confidentiality through the use
of key exchanges, digital signatures, and symmetric encryption
[7].
TLS establishes a secure channel via a handshake that
negotiates the protocol version, cipher suite, certificate, and
key exchange method before initiating symmetric encryption.
An important step of the handshake relevant to this paper
is digital signature verification, in which a server proves its
possession of a private key corresponding to the public key in
its certificate. Authentication of certificates in TLS is achieved
through public key infrastructure (PKI), requiring servers to
verify their digital signature. Certificate chains provide a
hierarchy of trust for the browser to verify a server’s identity.
There exist three levels of certificates: leaf, intermediate, and
root, with each certificate being signed by the level above it
and the root certificate serving as a trust anchor that is pre-
installed in the client’s device [14].
Cipher Suites and protocol versions provide guidelines on
how information is sent and interpreted. There exist two main
TLS protocols, namely TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3, with TLS 1.3
reducing latency, providing additional security, and allowing
for easier implementation of PQC. However, not all systems
have updated to TLS 1.3 due to legacy architectures and
difficulty of deployment [7].
TLS handshake delay stems from multiple sources. Over-
sized packets exceeding the MTU are segmented, increasing
the chance of drops and retransmissions [7] and thus adding
time to the handshake. TCP also imposes bandwidth con-
straints: the initial congestion window (IW) caps first-RTT
transmission at
14KB, requiring an extra RTT if exceeded
[15], and TCP slow start doubles the window each RTT,
creating an effective secondary threshold of 28KB, so trans-
missions exceeding 42KB total incur yet another RTT.
B. Post Quantum Cryptography Fundamentals
PQC was developed in response to the threat of cryp-
tographically relevant quantum computers (CRQCs), which
could break asymmetric algorithms like RSA and ECDHE via
Shor’s algorithm and weaken symmetric and hash functions
via Grover’s algorithms [1], [16]. The most pressing current
threat is ”harvest now, decrypt later,” where adversaries collect
encrypted data today to decrypt once CRQCs mature, poten-
tially within 10–20 years [2], enabling compromise of key
exchange and possible signature forgery.
In TLS, PQC augments or replaces classical algorithms for
key exchange and digital signatures. The most widely adopted
algorithms are ML-KEM (CRYSTALS-Kyber) for key ex-
change and ML-DSA (CRYSTALS-Dilithium) for signatures
[17]. Since these algorithms are not yet fully optimized for
real-world deployment, hybrid implementations are common,
combining PQC with traditional algorithms to maintain secu-
rity against both quantum and classical adversaries [18].
PQC key exchange, led by ML-KEM, has seen widespread
adoption, while PQC certificates remain largely experimental
due to their larger sizes and PKI integration requirements.
This proves to be a challenge, as the certificate chain structure
typically requires 1-2 additional certificates as intermediates,
drastically increasing total handshake sizes. These larger cer-
tificate sizes make handshakes more sensitive to congestion
window limits, and as a result, real-world deployments must
balance security and performance, specifically in latency-
sensitive structures such as CDNs [8].
C. Certificate Schemes in Classical and Post-Quantum TLS
Many different types of certificates exist, with more being
introduced as the field of PQC grows. This section provides
an overview of common certificates and outlines the certificate
schemes evaluated in this work. We provide data comparisons
in Table I. We ultimately settled on simulating ECDSA, ML-
DSA, SLH-DSA, and Merkle Trees configurations.

TABLE I: Our Comparison of Certificate Schemes and Structures and Their Impact on TLS [4], [5], [11]
Scheme
Type
Cert Size
Chain Size
Handshake Impact
Status
RSA
Classical (integer factorization)
Small (∼1–2 KB)
Small (∼3–5 KB)
Low latency
Deployed
ECDSA
Classical (elliptic curve)
Small (∼0.5–1.5 KB)
Small (∼2–4 KB)
Low latency
Widely deployed
ML-DSA
PQC (lattice)
Large (∼2.5–4 KB)
Large (∼8–15 KB)
Increased latency
Emerging
FALCON
PQC (lattice)
Moderate (∼1–2 KB)
Moderate (∼5–10 KB)
Moderate overhead
Experimental
Hybrid ML-DSA
Hybrid (classical + PQC)
Very
large
((∼3.5–6
KB))
Very
large
(∼12–25
KB)
High overhead
Transition
SLH-DSA
PQC (hash-based)
Very
large
(∼20–40
KB)
Very large (∼60–150
KB)
High overhead
Experimental
ML-DSA + MTC
Structure (Merkle-based)
∼2.5–4 KB (logical),
∼0.7–1.0 KB (proof)a
Same as cert size
Reduced
handshake
size
Research
SLH-DSA + MTC
Structure (Merkle-based)
∼2.5–4 KB (logical),
∼0.7–1.0 KB (proof)a
Same as cert size
Reduced
handshake
size
Research
a Assuming a Merkle tree with N ≈224 - 228 leaves and SHA-256 hashing, yielding proof sizes as demonstrated in Section II-C3.
Root
Certificate
Leaf
Certificate
Int. 1
Certificate
Int. 2
Certificate
Leaf
Certificate
Root
Certificate
Int.
Certificate
Leaf
Certificate
Unoptimized
CDN Optimized
Merkle
h1
Hash(Leaf)
h2
H(Leaf)
h3
H(Leaf)
h4
H(Leaf)
Other Certificates
h5
H(h1+h2)
h6
H(h3+h4)
h7
H(h5+h6)
Merkle Root (Signed by CA)
h1: "7f3a91c2e8d4b6a0f5ca1b4c7d9e2f8d1a7e…”
…
h5: "c4d8a1f93e0a5e8f1b9e2a7c4d6f1b3ea0c5…”
…
h7: "e9b2c7d4a1f8e3c6d4c7d1e9a2b6f3c8d0a5…”
Merkle Proof :
Hashed with h1 and h5 to derive h7
Fig. 1: Merkle Based Certificate Structure Compared to Traditional X.509 Structure
1) Traditional: The two most common traditional cer-
tificates are Rivest–Shamir–Adleman (RSA) [19] and Ellip-
tic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) [20], with
RSA being more common in older systems. RSA uses the
mathematical hardness of a prime factoring problem, often
containing larger certificate sizes than the elliptic curve-based
ECDSA certificates. ECDSA is increasingly preferred with
2-3x smaller certificates, lowering bandwidth and providing
faster signatures, but sometimes being incompatible with
legacy systems [21].
2) Post-Quantum: Given that traditional certificates are
being broken by Shor’s algorithm, newer certificates require
different mathematically hard problems, the most common be-
ing lattice or hash-based. The most common digital signatures
are Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Algorithm (ML-
DSA), formerly known as CRYSTALS-Dilithium, and State-
less Hash-Based Digital Signature Algorithm (SLH-DSA),
which is based on SPHINCS+. NIST has approved both
algorithms, with ML-DSA being the primary standard due to
its balance of security, performance, and size [22]. SLH-DSA,
while standardized, remains mostly impractical due to its huge
certificate sizes [5]. There also exist other algorithms, such as
Fast Fourier Lattice-based Compact Signatures over NTRU
(Falcon) [23], which contain smaller signatures than ML-
DSA. However, Falcon relies on high-precision floating-point
arithmetic, making it prone to timing side-channel vulnera-
bilities that complicate secure real-world implementation. As
previously mentioned, hybrid PQC algorithms, which combine
pure PQC with traditional algorithms, typically add 1KB to
certificate size. In our paper, we focus primarily on ML-DSA
due to its balance of signature size and performance, and SLH-
DSA to act as an edge case to examine the impact of larger
certificate sizes.
3) Merkle Trees: For TLS 1.3 X.509 certificates, digital
signatures are generated by signing a hash of the message
using the signer’s private key and verifying it with the corre-
sponding public key. Each certificate is required to be signed
by its issuer, scaling the certificate size with the chain depth,
significantly increasing overall handshake size. Merkle Tree
Certificate schemes eliminate intermediate certificates by using
a Merkle proof to prove that it is within a CA authority-
signed set. We provide a demonstration of the structure of
a Merkle Certificate Scheme in Figure 1. It is important to
note that Merkle Tree Certificates are a method of proving
certificate authenticity and not actual certificates themselves.
They differ from the standard X.509 structure, having the CA
authority sign the Merkle root, with each leaf containing a
Merkle proof that proves its identity through its hash path to

the root, removing the need for certificate chain intermediates.
The proof size of an MTC is proportional to the product
of the tree height and the hash size [4]. The hash size is
32 bytes when using the SHA-256 algorithm, and the tree
height is log2(N) where N is the number of leaves. (35)
Typically, a CA contains anywhere from 224 - 228 leaves,
producing MTC proof sizes of around
700–900 bytes [24].
The MTC leaf size can be expressed as the sum of the original
certificate size and the Merkle proof size. While we do not
expect much of a decrease in overhead for traditional schemes
whose intermediate certificates are not much larger than the
proof size, PQC certificates benefit greatly, removing the size
complexity introduced by PKI.
D. Content Delivery Networks
Content Delivery Networks are a system of geographically
arranged servers that use caching to reduce content delivery
time to users. They implement edge server infrastructure,
routing users to the nearest server, focusing on optimizing
performance, availability, and scalability to provide users the
minimum latency possible. CDNs typically terminate the TLS
connection at the edge server, resulting in user connections
being between the CDN rather than with the origin server [8],
[25]. The CDN controls all aspects of the handshake, making
handshake efficiency critical to overall CDN performance.
Larger key and certificate sizes pose a particular challenge for
CDNs, which are centered around low latencies. The increased
handshake sizes are more sensitive to congestion window
limits than classical alternatives, where each additional RTT
incurred carries significant latency penalties at CDN scale.
Even small amounts of packet loss can significantly affect
aggregate latency. CDNs utilize various optimizations such
as geographical location, certificate chain compression, and
session resumption to lower latency for users.
1) Geographical Proximity: RTT, which typically domi-
nates end-to-end latency, is affected by a variety of factors,
such as routing inefficiency, network congestion, processing
delay, and other overhead. A larger physical distance results
in a longer propagation delay, which in turn leads to a higher
RTT. Local connections typically exhibit RTTs of
1-10ms,
regional connections
10-40ms, continental connections
40-
90ms, and intercontinental connections
120-200+ms [26].
Fig. 2: Example Visual of Distances
CDNs are strategically positioned so that users are usually
within 10-50ms of a CDN node. Due to their geographical
proximity to end users, CDNs are expected to significantly
reduce end-to-end latency compared to non-CDN deploy-
ments. Since TLS handshakes require at least one round trip,
any additional round trips that may occur due to bandwidth
penalties increase the latency proportionally [27]. Additionally,
PQC, which has a larger handshake size and is therefore more
prone to packet loss and retransmissions, will benefit from a
shorter RTT during its increased retransmissions.
2) Certificate Size Optimizations: CDNs optimize certifi-
cate chains by omitting unnecessary intermediates, choosing
shorter trust paths, or using a chain based on the client’s root
trust CAs. The CDN server is not required to send every
intermediate certificate, often sending less if the user already
has certificates cached. CDNs also typically maintain multi-
ple pre-configured certificate chains for a domain, targeting
different client capabilities (e.g., legacy vs modern browsers),
dynamically selecting the shortest compatible chain for each
connection [28]. A CDN’s distributed edge architecture allows
it to dynamically control which intermediate certificates are
served, without being constrained by the fixed configurations
typical of origin servers. Although these optimizations are
small for lower RTT, they reduce packet loss and provide
potential for lowering handshake sizes below window size
limits [29].
3) Session Resumption: Session resumption allows clients
to reconnect without requiring a full handshake through the use
of session tickets to resume data exchange [38]. These session
tickets eliminate the need for certificate chains, certificate
verification, handshake signatures, or full key exchange setup,
effectively removing PQC overhead [7]. While also present
in origin servers, it is much more common in CDNs due to
their aggressive optimization tendencies. As a result, certificate
size impacts on latency may be additionally reduced for CDN
structures. Through optimizations, the effect of certificate size
on latency has the potential to be reduced using CDN-based
architecture.
III. RELATED WORKS
Post-Quantum deployments with respect to transport secu-
rity have been widely studied. Particularly, handshake latency
and size inflation across PQC-based algorithms in TLS 1.3
have been comprehensively reviewed in works by Sikeridis
et al., comparing various certificate schemes under realistic
conditions [31], [37]. Subsequent studies have further ex-
plored this topic, analyzing key exchanges and authentications
showing increases in TLS handshake latencies, specifically
measuring how window sizes affect slowdowns [30].
Recent Works. A high-level summary of topics covered by
related work is provided in Table II. PQC assessments using
OQS show that handshake size inflation, cryptographic com-
putation, and network conditions significantly affect latency
[32], [33], with bandwidth and fragmentation dependencies
noted across key exchange schemes [30]. Although certificate

TABLE II: Comparison of Prior Research vs. Our Work
Feature
Related Work
This Work
Primary Variable
General handshake size and protocol-level overhead. [30], [31]
Isolates certificate chain size as the primary determinant of time
to first byte.
Network Analysis
Continuous modeling of packet loss and propagation delay. [30],
[31]
Identifies discrete transport layer flight limits for PQC (thresh-
olds at 10KB and 40KB).
Benchmarking
Direct comparison of pure PQC vs. classical algorithms. [32],
[33]
Employs size-matched ECDSA simulations to isolate imple-
mentation vs. network overhead.
Optimization
MTC optimization on PQC certificates and CDN optimizations
for classical schemes [4], [28], [34].
Experimental evaluation of MTC and CDN-specific optimiza-
tions for PQC environments.
Infrastructure
Generic TLS 1.3 environments and PQC protocol adoption rates.
[35], [36]
Focuses on CDN vs. Non-CDN performance in latency-sensitive
architectures.
Empirical Grounding
General internet-wide scanning (e.g., Censys, Zeek). [35], [37]
Utilizes NCSA-monitored TLS traffic to quantify real-world
CDN session resumption rates.
hierarchy work has examined chain configurations and place-
ment under PQC TLS 1.3 [31], a key gap remains in that
no prior work isolates certificate chain size as an independent
latency contributor.
Prior work on transport layer evaluations has examined TCP
congestion control, MTU limits, and initial window sizes as
determinants of handshake overhead, including how larger
handshake sizes can trigger additional round trips due to
fragmentation. However, these factors are typically measured
in combination, rather than isolating the discrete latency
thresholds with respect to the size of the certificate chain under
PQC [30], [31].
CDNs have been widely studied for latency-reduction strate-
gies such as session resumption and edge server placement,
which reduce overhead by eliminating certificate retransmis-
sion and minimizing RTT [39]. Certificate chain size reduc-
tions have also been examined as a mitigation strategy [29],
though these optimizations are largely limited to traditional
schemes with minimal PQC exploration. No existing work
directly compares CDN-specific certificate chain optimizations
under PQC, nor examines how such optimizations relate to
transport layer bandwidth thresholds.
MTC reduces certificate transmission by replacing X.509
chains with a single proof, though prior work remains focused
on design and implementation rather than empirical evaluation
under realistic conditions [34].
Internet-wide tools like Zeek have been used to analyze
TLS deployments [37], but lack direct CDN vs. non-CDN
comparisons and connections to PQC simulations.
Novelty. Unlike previous work, this paper isolates certificate
chain size as the primary variable of study, constructing PQC
certificate chains of varying sizes and mirroring these sizes
in traditional X.509 simulations for comparison. The contrast
of the two allows us to identify how latency varies between
the two as certificate chain sizes increase. We also analyze and
indicate where transport-level packet flight limits occur, noting
their discrete increases in TTFB with respect to certificate
size. We propose the usage of Merkle Tree Certificates (MTC)
and CDN chain size optimizations, namely session resumption
and certificate size optimizations, to keep handshake sizes
below packet flight thresholds. We additionally quantify the
ranges and savings of staying below the said threshold for our
simulated data.
IV. OUR CDN FINDINGS
We analyze traffic from an NCSA with national traffic
data to evaluate real-world TLS deployments and session
resumption rates for CDN and non-CDN servers. Our data
set comprises Zeek-monitored [12], [13] TLS logs from real-
world traffic that include metadata on conducted handshakes,
such as protocol version, session reuse indicators, and other
certificate-related fields. While the logs contained various data
about certificates and handshakes, we mainly analyzed the TLS
adoption and session resumption rates.
We classified CDNs based on their Autonomous System
Number (ASN), using GeoIP’s IP to ASN mapping to asso-
ciate each entry with an organization [40]. We compared the
ASN to a list of known CDN ASNs to label CDN endpoints.
Note that our CDN ASN label was strict in order to specifically
observe CDN behaviors. We classified our data into 4 groups,
with the groups being: 1.) CDN, 2.) Cloud, 3.) Non-CDN, and
4.) unidentified. We intentionally separated them into distinct
categories, only comparing CDN and non-CDN cases.
Observed Trends. Table III shows that CDNs have a
significantly higher TLS 1.3 adoption rate (84.74%) compared
to non-CDNs (75.73%), consistent with CDNs’ tendency to
prioritize modern, low-latency protocol configurations. More
importantly, session resumption rates are much higher for
CDNs, with 94.16% of TLS 1.3 connections using session
resumption as compared to 46.09% of non-CDNs. Overall,
CDNs had an 80.30% resumption rate, whereas non-CDNs
only had 35.44%. We note that most modern systems, as
determined by their usage of TLS 1.3, use session resumptions
with CDNs, and legacy systems most likely do not support
session resumption, bringing down the rates.
We also provide a measurement of the trend of session
resumption since January 2025 until the time of writing this
paper, April 2026 using the same NCSA data in Figure 3. The
plot supports our conclusion as we see correlation between
the TLS 1.3 and overall session resumption rate. We thus see

TABLE III: Session Resumption Rates for CDN and Non-
CDN Endpoints
Metric
CDN
Non-CDN
TLS 1.3 Adoption (%)
84.74
75.73
Session Resumption (TLS 1.3, %)
94.16
46.09
Session Resumption (All, %)
80.30
35.44
Data collected over a 24-hour snapshot from an NCSA. (Apr. 14 2026)
Fig. 3: Session Resumption and TLS 1.3 Rates from 16 months
of NCSA data.
that as TLS 1.3 continues to become more prevalent, session
resumption rates will likely also rise.
However, we have to note several limitations of our setup.
First, ASN-based classification is not fully accurate, as cloud
providers can be both CDN or non-CDN, causing possible mis-
classification. Additionally, Zeek logs only provide metadata
rather than full packet captures, which does not allow full
visibility into fragmentation, packet loss, or precise timings.
More detailed data would allow controlled experiments of
TTFB in real settings, allowing for a comparison of TTFB
for resumed handshakes.
Empirical Insight. Despite limitations, this is the first
paper to perform measurements of certificate chain size on
TTFB. These results allow us to see real-world applications of
session resumption and how CDNs aggressively optimize their
connections to reduce handshake overhead. This is particularly
important in the context of PQC, where session resumption
may allow for reduced latencies of larger certificate chains in
realistic deployments.
TABLE IV: Comparison of Certificate Component Sizes
Across Schemes
Scheme
Configuration
Leaf (KB)
Intermediate (KB)
ECDSA
Standard Chain
1.0
2.0
SLH-DSA
Standard Chain
16.6
32.1
MTC Variant
17.6
–
ML-DSA
Standard Chain
3.9
8.0
MTC Variant
4.8
–
MTC entries omit intermediate values, as the scheme does not utilize
intermediate certificates.
V. OUR PQC SIMULATIONS TESTBED
This section is focused on isolating and analyzing how
latencies vary across different certificate chain schemes and
sizes. We compare how Post-Quantum implementations of in-
creased certificate chains compare to similarly sized traditional
certificate chains, specifically noting how size increase impacts
latency, measuring the time to first byte (TTFB) as our main
metric. For our simulations, we use OpenSSL, performing a
TLS handshake and HTTP GET request, to determine the time
from sending the request until the first byte received. We chose
this as our primary metric as it has not been widely studied
and it reflects the most realistic real world usage, directly
measuring the time until a response.
Experimental Setup. For all of our measurements, we
ran a simple OpenSSL TLS s server, sending an HTTPS
request through that TLS connection. For communication
between our client and server, we used two Amazon Web
Services EC2 Ohio servers to simulate real network behaviors,
keeping both client and server in the same region so as not to
introduce too many external variables. To introduce delay into
our simulations, we used tc netem, a traffic control network
emulator, injecting delay on both the forwards and reverse
path. It is important to note for our values, we include time
of start up overhead, measuring the full end-to-end execution
time rather than just the time corresponding to the raw network
data.
To emulate varying certificate chains for Post-Quantum as
well as traditional infrastructure, we artificially inflated the
certificate sizes by adding non-critical certificate extensions so
as not to affect certificate verification time, padding the DER
encoded length of the certificate. Thus, we were able to solely
analyze the network overhead due to increased certificate chain
size without affecting certificate verification times. We were
able to perform this for Post-Quantum certificates in addition
to traditional ones through Open Quantum Safe’s (OQS) open
source library. (33) It is important to note that at the time,
AWS didn’t support OpenSSL 3.5, which is required for
OQS, causing us to run the servers on Docker containers. We
compare the inflated traditional certificates to inflated Post-
Quantum certificates to note whether the difference in TLS
stacks had any effect on latencies as certificate chain sizes
increased.
A. Evaluation of Open Quantum Safe Distinctions
We begin our study by comparing the OQS implementation
TTFB to a standard TLS 1.3 stack to assess whether the
differing TLS stacks cause any disparities. We start with the
minimal handshake, measuring the TTFB for both cases. We
ran 100 simulations for each case with this setup, computing
the mean and standard deviation for each one. The time to
first byte was measured by starting a timer, establishing a
TCP connection, completing the full TLS handshake, sending
an HTTPS request, and stopping the timer after receiving the
first byte. We can model the TTFB as follows:
TTFB = TTCP + TTLS + Trequest + Tresponse
(1)

Certificate Configuration. To compare only the difference
between the PQC and traditional TLS stack, we ran a minimal
handshake. We only measured the TTFB of a raw TLS con-
nection without enforcing certificate verification and sending
a minimal HTTP request. We carried this out for ML-DSA
and Hybrid ML-DSA, using OQS first to run the minimal
session, and then padding traditional ECDSA certificate sizes
to size match the ML-DSA certificates. We used ML-DSA-
44 and P256-ML-DSA-44 for our specific PQC certificates
and P256 for our specific ECDSA certificate given their
widespread usage. We also used the hybrid ML-KEM-768 key.
To fully isolate how certificate chain size affects the TTFB, we
experimented with having 0, 1, and 2 intermediate certificates,
observing how the TTFB grew.
Limited Impact of Propagation Delay. We observe that
from our results in Table V that OQS has a significantly larger
TTFB than our simulated data, with a roughly 50-55ms differ-
ence. This difference was likely due to PQC key and certificate
generation overhead or the TLS stack difference of OQS.
Since the minimal TLS connection produced a handshake of
roughly the same size, the difference is likely attributable
to the TLS stack itself rather than the certificate chain size.
To show this, we graphed the incremental TTFB relative to
the number of intermediate certificates added, as shown in
Figure 4. We see that as the number of intermediates, and
therefore certificate chain sizes increase, Post-Quantum and
traditional schemes remain relatively similar in incremental
TTFB. As the certificate chain size increases, the increase
in TTFB is nearly negligible compared to the total TTFB
increase, suggesting that for PQC the TTFB is dominated by
implementation rather than actual network propagation. We
conclude that under our tested conditions, end-to-end latency
is dominated by TLS and protocol differences rather than
increased latency due to size inflation.
The OQS results for hybrid being an additional ∼4ms
cannot be explained by certificate size alone, as hybrid chains
are only ∼1 KB larger, and our experiments show minimal
TTFB differences between increased certificate-sized schemes.
This indicates that the observed increase is most likely due
to implementation overhead rather than transmission cost.
Fig. 4: Minimal OQS vs TLS implementations
The similar incremental delays observed with each additional
certificate indicate that the impact of certificate size is largely
independent of whether we use inflated ECDSA or ML-
DSA certificates. These results suggest that our simulations of
artificially inflated certificates are sufficiently representative of
the effects of modeling TTFB for certificate chains increase.
Our results also indicate that TTFB is not primarily driven
by propogation delay in OQS systems, implying in real world
deployments, latency is instead largely influenced by overhead
from differences in implementation.
B. RTT Impact on TTFB Across Varying Certificate Schemes
In this section, we aim to compare how TTFB is affected by
varying certificate chain sizes for different RTTs. We not only
use the RTTs to analyze the effect of transmission delays, but
to also mimic differing geographic distances.
We use the same setup as described in Section V, again
running 100 simulations for each case, measuring mean and
standard deviations. However, for this evaluation, we introduce
delay into our simulations by injecting a 2-way RTT. In order
to further explore more realistic conditions, we opted to use
a full TLS handshake with certificate verification along with
the HTTP request. In addition to our varying certificates, we
include a session resumption case for each certificate scheme,
where we measure the TTFB using session tickets rather than
a full handshake. For the resumed session, we first ran a full
TLS handshake to establish the session and then measured the
subsequent connections of that session. To examine how TTFB
changed with varying certificate chain sizes, we used chain
sizes corresponding to real certificate schemes, with chain size
varying as a function of the cryptographic scheme. It is impor-
tant to note that we didn’t implement the actual cryptographic
protocols or Merkle Tree structure, only artificially simulating
their sizes by padding with certificate extensions. Additionally,
we only used 1 intermediate to not introduce too many
variables. For choosing the size of certificates, we refer to
NIST standards, specifically looking at ML-DSA-44 and SLH-
DSA-192s. (34)(35) ML-DSA-44 serves as a representative
TABLE V: Comparison of TTFB Between Classical Size-
Matched Simulations and PQC (OQS)
Scheme
Certificate
Chain
Simulated (ms)
OQS (ms)
ML-DSA
Leaf (3.9 KB)
5.46 ± 0.22
56.81 ± 0.72
Leaf + 1 Int.
(7.9 KB)
6.11 ± 0.18
57.26 ± 0.72
Leaf + 2 Ints.
(11.9 KB)
6.85 ± 0.20
57.48 ± 0.56
Hybrid ML-DSA
Leaf (4.8 KB)
5.47 ± 0.16
60.79 ± 1.12
Leaf + 1 Int.
(9.5 KB)
6.16 ± 0.16
62.01 ± 0.78
Leaf + 2 Ints.
(14.3 KB)
6.80 ± 0.22
63.03 ± 0.72
While increasing the number of intermediates impacts ECDSA size-
matched certificates, propagation delay effects are limited in the OQS
implementation.

TABLE VI: Time to First Byte Across Round Trip Times for Different Certificate Schemes (ECDSA Based)
Certificate Scheme
No RTT
10 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
ECDSA X.509
8.06 ± 0.31
28.71 ± 0.17
109.00 ± 1.18
208.84 ± 0.20
409.10 ± 1.80
ML-DSA
7.98 ± 0.37
28.88 ± 1.65
108.77 ± 0.19
208.80 ± 0.22
408.83 ± 0.25
SLH-DSA
8.29 ± 0.23
39.20 ± 0.20
159.41 ± 0.32
309.41 ± 0.34
609.45 ± 0.57
MTC + ML-DSA
7.47 ± 0.28
28.28 ± 0.18
108.96 ± 0.95
208.37 ± 0.16
408.63 ± 1.28
MTC + SLH-DSA
7.73 ± 0.34
40.03 ± 0.90
158.77 ± 0.18
309.20 ± 1.38
608.84 ± 0.24
Session Resumption
7.01 ± 0.14
27.39 ± 0.15
107.49 ± 0.15
207.60 ± 1.00
407.63 ± 1.01
Note: Each entry is the TTFB
TABLE VII: Time to First Byte Across Round Trip Times for Different Certificate Schemes (ML-DSA Based)
Certificate Scheme
No RTT
10 ms
50 ms
100 ms
200 ms
ML-DSA
331.08 ± 7.53
381.50 ± 38.93
538.21 ± 10.08
748.01 ± 49.55
1155.84 ± 54.33
SLH-DSA
341.43 ± 47.79
385.37 ± 8.54
594.48 ± 29.44
845.59 ± 8.80
1357.31 ± 55.95
MTC + ML-DSA
333.04 ± 24.55
370.35 ± 7.46
544.16 ± 72.77
743.22 ± 36.80
1157.77 ± 83.97
MTC + SLH-DSA
328.96 ± 7.35
392.08 ± 78.71
591.42 ± 33.09
849.04 ± 57.45
1351.17 ± 31.35
Session Resumption
340.19 ± 24.35
381.35 ± 23.49
547.51 ± 30.79
740.31 ± 10.39
1152.69 ± 41.05
Note: Each entry is the TTFB (ms)
baseline for post-quantum signature schemes with moderate
size overhead, while SLH-DSA-192s was chosen due to its
larger certificate size to act as an edge case. The sizes we
used are noted in Table IV.
Geographical Impact. We ran our experiments for both
ECDSA and ML-DSA-based certificates as seen in Table VII
and Table VI. We use RTT to approximate the geographical
distances as referenced in Figure 2. While we see a strong
impact of RTT for our ECDSA-based simulation, with RTT
dominating the TTFB, the ML-DSA simulations remain less
affected. We still see that ML-DSA simulations are largely
influenced by RTT at higher RTTs, but in most cases, and
in cases of CDNs, RTT will rarely reach such edge cases.
As discussed previously, the large overhead of Post-Quantum
Cryptography has a substantial impact on latencies, especially
for CDNs.
ML-DSA vs. ECDSA. We observe that TTFB values
remained relatively similar for ECDSA and all ML-DSA cases,
as no significant increases in ms were observed. However,
for both SLH-DSA and SLH-DSA + MTC cases, we see that
the TTFB increases by a whole RTT. Within the ECDSA and
ML-DSA cases and the SLH-DSA cases, we are unable to
observe a noticeable difference in TTFB due to the reduction in
certificate chain size that MTC would be expected to introduce.
This can be explained in Table V, where we note that increases
in TTFB due purely to size were on the scale of tenths of
microseconds, which we also noted were overshadowed by the
latency increases caused by TLS stack implementations. We
note much larger standard deviations for our full experiments
due to simulating a full connection in these simulations, mask-
ing out the latency impacts of increased certificate chain sizes.
While we ran a session resumption case for each certificate
scheme, we noticed that the data stayed relatively the same
across all of our cases. This is consistent with how session
resumption functions since it doesn’t depend on certificates or
keys, instead only verifying the session ticket. One limitation
of our simulation of session resumption was that the TTFB
values reflect end-to-end application response time rather than
just TLS handshake latency. Client and server process startup
overhead in addition to TCP connection establishment could
have caused the session resumption values to be masked by
the larger overhead of other components.
Bandwidth Flight Windows. The important takeaway of
our simulations is the added RTT for the SLH-DSA cases
increased TTFB by up to 1.5x for extreme cases. While
transmission delay due to size caused increased TTFBs as we
saw in Figure 4, it doesn’t cause the addition of a full RTT.
The most likely explanation for this is that there are band-
width limitations on the network, or more specifically, packet
transmission windows, which limit how much data can be ”in
flight” at once. From our data, we observe that ML-DSA and
ECDSA are small enough to fit within one flight of data,
whereas SLH-DSA crosses the flight boundary ”threshold”.
Since the TTFB is dominated by mostly non-network-related
latencies, ML-DSA is small enough so that it has similar
overhead due to size as traditional X.509 certificates. We
provide a figure demonstrating the extra RTT introduced by
SLH-DSA as compared to an ML-DSA certificate in Figure 6.
The figure shows a simulated PQC handshake between a
California and Ohio EC2 AWS server using only ML-DSA.
The SLH-DSA certificate was not included in the transmission,
only acting to demonstrate how exceeding the Bandwidth
Initial Window adds an RTT.
For our OQS simulation, we see that for certificate chain
sizes within packet transmission window sizes, certificate size
has little to no effect on the TTFB. A point of interest,
however, is whether the certificate size optimizations are able
to reduce the certificate size under the threshold, fitting in a

Fig. 5: Certificate Chain Size Optimizations allowing for
bypassing of bandwidth penalty thresholds
TABLE VIII: Optimization Regions Across Certificate Size
Thresholds
Optimization
Lower Bound (KB)
Upper Bound (KB)
MTC (1 int.)
10–18
40–78
MTC (2 int.)
10–27
40–117
CDN (25%)
10–13
40–53
CDN (40%)
10–17
40–67
single flight of data. We also note session resumptions being
able to achieve the same effect, removing multiple RTTs in
extreme cases.
C. Mitigating Bandwidth Penalty Through Certificate Size
Optimizations
We analyze the threshold limits discussed in the previous
section, noting precisely where they occur and how certificate
chain optimizations are able to lower certificate chains under
said thresholds. We maintain the same setup as Section V-B,
instead opting to vary certificate size more continuously to
isolate where extra RTTs are added. We start with a certificate
size of 4KB, increasing by 2KB until 80KB. We used 10 trials
per data point and ran simulations for ML-DSA and ECDSA-
based algorithms for RTTs of 50 and 100ms. We didn’t
measure lower RTTs as the OQS implementation obscures any
differences they make.
We notice a couple fluctuations in Figure 5 for the values of
ML-DSA-based certificates, largely due to network variability
being amplified by the RTT. We see our RTT spikes occur
at relatively the same certificate chain sizes for ECDSA and
ML-DSA, being around 10KB and 40KB. We also observe
that RTT doesn’t affect where thresholds occur, only affecting
the TTFB.
Optimization Heuristics. We approximate the certificate
chain savings of Merkle Tree structures as ChainSize
2
+ 1 KB
for 1 intermediate and ChainSize
3
+ 1 KB for 2 intermediates.
Fig. 6: Our Sample ML-DSA Handshake Between Ohio and
California EC2 Servers
Our MTC size were derived from the underlying Merkle
Tree structure as demonstrated in Section II-C3 rather than
arbitrary assumptions. As a result, while we are unable to
directly implement MTC, the estimated certificate sizes remain
a realistic approximation of network behavior even without
full implementation. We are unable to directly simulate CDN
chain optimizations, approximating them according to several
studies that claim chain sizes can be reduced by up to 40-50%
[41], [42]. While we are unsure whether chain optimizations
are applicable to PQC, we evaluate their potential impact
on TTFB. Thus, we model savings as (ChainSize) ∗0.75
for moderate reduction and (ChainSize) ∗0.60 for more
aggressive optimizations.
MTC and CDN Savings. We provide the ranges in which
MTC and CDN optimizations are able to lower the certificate
chain size enough to be under the BDP threshold for our
simulated setup in Figure 5, providing our exact values in
Table VIII. Within our simulation data, MTC optimizations
enable certificate chains with one intermediate, ranging from
10–18 KB and 40–78 KB, to avoid bandwidth penalties
entirely, while two-intermediate chains remain unaffected up
to 10–27 KB and 40–117 KB. For CDN optimizations, we ob-
serve smaller ranges with chain size extensions from 10 to 13-
17KB and 40 to 53-67KB. We see that for one intermediate,
MTC allows for nearly double the size of certificate chains,
and for two intermediates, it allows for nearly triple. Note that
CDN optimizations that we approximate remain unaffected by
intermediate count. We see that CDN optimizations allow for
a 130% to 167% increase in certificate chain sizes according
to our assumptions.
Session Resumption Savings. We also demonstrate pos-

Fig. 7: Average savings of ∼2x due to session resumption for
CDNs compared to non-CDNs
sible savings due to session resumption bypassing overhead
from bandwidth penalties in Figure 7. Using the data gathered
from Zeek, we multiply the total session resumption rates
found in Table III with the savings from Figure 5. We
approximate the session resumption TTFB as the TTFB found
before the first threshold. For 50ms and 100ms RTTs, we see
savings from 40-80ms and 75-155ms, respectively, depending
on the certificate chain size, with nearly twice the TTFB
savings in CDN compared to non-CDNs. Moreover, as TLS
1.3 adoption continues to increase, we expect to see higher
rates of average savings. While the TTFB savings we found
are modest compared to the total TTFB, small differences in
latency can accumulate at scale, especially for CDNs.
D. Limitations
We note several limitations in our setup. Although our OQS
simulations allowed for experimentation with PQC certificates,
we had limited insight into applications across various TLS
stacks. Furthermore, we were unable to test real applications of
Merkle Tree-configured certificates, nor meaningfully reduce
certificate chain sizes with CDN optimizations. Additionally,
our measurements were conducted without specifically ana-
lyzing packet loss or failure rates, which may affect TTFB
in real deployments. The precision of our ASN classification
could be improved to provide more accurate results. Despite
these limitations, our primary conclusions were unlikely to be
affected by these small variations.
VI. POST-QUANTUM CERTIFICATE DEPLOYMENT
IMPLICATIONS
Our results show that the impact of certificate chain size
is mainly caused by network-level constraints rather than by
transmission overhead alone. In our experiments, we observe
clear bandwidth window thresholds, specifically at 10 and 40
KB-sized certificate chains for our Post-Quantum implemen-
tation. Crossing these limits introduces an additional RTT to
the total TTFB, with the TTFB jumping discretely at these
values. This indicates that TTFB remains relatively the same
between threshold ranges, increasing disproportionately across
those boundaries.
Key Insight 1. End-to-end delay is largely dominated by
bandwidth limits and implementation overhead rather than
pure packet propagation. In comparing padded ECDSA cer-
tificates to their ML-DSA counterparts, we isolated network
and implementation effects, allowing us to directly analyze
the impact of certificate chain sizes on latency. We saw
that the OQS measurements were larger than the traditional
implementations of TLS 1.3, indicating that in practical de-
ployments, TTFB is dominated by implementation rather than
data transfer overhead. Moreover, by mimicking the behavior
of larger geographic distances with an increased RTT, we
observe that packet transmission delays negligibly affect TTFB
compared to bandwidth packet window restrictions.
Key Insight 2. Certificate chain optimizations are able
to reduce TTFB by keeping chain size within the bandwidth
delay threshold. We compare approximated MTC and CDN
optimizations to reduce certificate chain size to be under
bandwidth limit penalties. We observe ∼2-3x-sized certificates
with MTC and up to ∼1.6x certificate chains with CDNs
while still remaining below thresholds. The minimal TTFB
impact of larger certificates indicates that implementations
can adopt more secure or robust certificate chains without
incurring substantial additional overhead.
Key Insight 3. NCSA-backed CDN measurements of session
resumption provides additional insight for maintaining TTFB
despite bandwidth limits. Large TTFBs have consequences
exemplified in CDNs, which are centered around low-latency
connections. We see that session resumption is also able
to bypass the aforementioned boundaries, saving RTT. We
integrate our findings with Zeek-monitored NCSA data to
compare session resumption rates and savings across CDNs
and non CDNs. Additionally, we analyze trends over a year-
long period to demonstrate session resumption rates over time,
noting a correlation between TLS 1.3 and overall session
resumption rates.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
We discuss various implementations of Post-Quantum Cer-
tificates across various schemes and structures, specifically
focusing on certificate chain size impact on TTFB. We note
the predominant cause of TTFB increase and present several
ways to reduce it, supporting our results with real-world
data from an NCSA and discuss implications for future PQC
implementation.
Some directions of future work are to examine fragmenta-
tion and packet loss for varying certificate chain sizes, particu-
larly noting how certificate chain size reductions would benefit
latencies in Post-Quantum applications. Another direction of
future study is using more detailed data to better model the
effects of CDN properties on latency and running certificate
chain simulations on real-world CDN infrastructure.