Detecting Avalanche Effect in Adversarial
Settings: Spotting the Encryption Loops
in Ransomware
Transportation Research Record
0000, Vol. XX(X) 1–14
©National Academy of Sciences:
Transportation Research Board 0000
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
journals.sagepub.com/home/trr
SAGE
Nanqing Luo1, Xusheng Li2, Haizhou Wang1, Shuangyi Zhu3, Yuan Ma4, Peng Liu1
Abstract
Spotting encryption loops in binary-only ransomware is
a critical reverse engineering task. Since the existence of
avalanche effect, an intrinsic characteristic of any secure
encryption algorithms, is unavoidable during a victim data
encryption attack, it is a very promising direction to
spot encryption loops through avalanche effect detection.
Unfortunately, no existing work in this direction ensures
that the being-checked effect is the avalanche effect itself.
Although CipherXRay (1) is inspired by avalanche effect, it
only checks whether a “ripple effect” (i.e., a necessary but
non-sufficient condition) of avalanche effect exists, allowing
a straightforward counterattack to succeed. In this work, we
present a new approach that checks the avalanche effect itself.
Because the detection is conducted in adversarial settings
(e.g., the ransomware author may obfuscate the code), a
viable approach must tolerate inaccurate input & output
identification and must be resilient to adversarial evasion.
These challenges are addressed by a novel record-and-replay
detection mechanism that takes advantages of the statistical
guarantees provided by the Shapiro–Wilk normality test.
The experiment results show that our approach achieves
achieves 0.0% false negative rate and 1.1% false positive
rate. When our tool is employed to reverse engineer real-
world ransomware samples, it succeeds in analyzing all
the ransomware samples selected from ten representative
families.
Introduction
Ransomware attack is a massive cyberattack that encrypts
victims’ data for ransom. WannaCry (2) in May 2017
is the first high-profile ransomware attack. WannaCry
leveraged “EternalBlue”, a highly effective exploit against
Server Message Block (SMB), a protocol that allows
machines to share files over a Windows network. Within 30
days, this worldwide attack had compromised over 200,000
systems. In recent years, ransomware attacks have become
an increasingly more serious societal threat due to not
only the increasing amount of security loss caused by real-
world enterprise networks, but also the increasing amount of
disruptions caused to critical infrastructures. For example,
the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack (3) in May 2021
has brought one of the largest and most vital oil pipelines in
the United States to a shutdown for one week. (The pipeline
comprises more than 5,500 miles of pipes.)
struct enc_file { 
char zero_0[8];
char inst_id[8];
char zero_1[8]; 
char REC_PUB_AES_PRIV[0x80];
char GLOB_PUB[0x44];
char SESS_AES_KEY[0x80];
char aes_iv_file_enc[0x10];
uint32_t orig_file_size;
char enc_data[0];
};
……
PUSH DWORD PTR DS:[EAX]; instance ID 
……
……
PUSH DWORD PTR DS:[EBX+0x100]; global key
……
PUSH 6610h
PUSH [ebp+var_0]
CALL CryptGenKey; generate key
……
MOV DWORD PTR DS:[EBX+0x14]; IV
……
PUSH DWORD PTR DS:[EBP-24]; buffer_len
PUSH DWORD PTR SS:[EBP-1C]; read_content_ptr
CALL ADVAPI32.CryptEncryptA
……
a) Loop body of Encryption Process in TeslaCrypt
b) Structure of encrypted file
Figure 1. Encrypted file structure analysis through loop body of
encryption process in TeslaCrypt.
Being a critical aspect of malware analysis, reverse
engineering plays an indispensable role in defending against
ransomware attacks. Besides such standard malware reverse
engineering tasks as disassembly (4), type inference (5),
function recognition (6), memory dependence analysis, and
data/control dependence analysis (7), one unique task in
ransomware reverse engineering is to identify and understand
the program code used to encrypt victims’ data. The
importance of this unique task is illustrated in Figure 1, where
a simplified encryption loop body of the TeslaCrypt
ransomware (8) is shown on the left, and the (simplified)
1Pennsylvania State University
2Vector 35 Inc.
3Agricultural Bank of China
4University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Prepared using TRR.cls [Version: 2020/08/31 v1.00]
arXiv:2604.24131v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

2
Transportation Research Record XX(X)
structure of a file encrypted by TeslaCrypt is on the right.
What is important here are the connections between the left
side and the right side, represented by the directed edges.
For example, the first line of code on the left can guide the
analyst to pinpoint the inst_id field in the encrypted file:
this field tells the analyst the family/type of ransomware. The
second line on the left can guide the analyst to pinpoint the
GLOB_PUB field: this field tells the analyst the public key for
asymmetric encryption (e.g., RSA). The third line on the left
can guide the analyst to pinpoint the encrypted AES key in
the encrypted file.
Although this unique reverse engineering task is crucial,
fulfilling this task in the real world involves arduous manual
labor due to several reasons, including but not limited to
the following ones: (Gap A) The existing code-similarity-
based methods (e.g., (9, 10)) detect the encryption loop
with high false positives. (Gap B) Existing pattern-based
(i.e., signature/heuristic-based) methods (e.g.(11, 12)) are
not scalable when handling newly emerged encryption
algorithms. (Gap C) Existing methods inspired by the
avalanche effect (1) suffer from adversarial evasion which
will be described in Section Data flow based counterattack
against CipherXRay.
This work seeks to develop an analysis method that
can automatically spot the encryption loops in ransomware.
Although this work is not the first avalanche-effect-inspired
attempt to spot encryption loops, it is the first work that aims
to achieve the needed resilience against adversarial evasion
(i.e., the ransomware author can adversarially obfuscate the
code in a variety of ways) than the existing approaches.
Besides achieving resilience against adversarial evasion,
our method aims to achieve high accuracy, thus addressing
the primary limitation of code-similarity-based methods, and
aims to be scalable, thus addressing the primary limitation
of pattern-based methods. Our method is based on two key
observations: (1) The limitations identified in Gap A and Gap
B can be effectively addressed through the application of
avalanche effect detection, and (2) Gap C can be addressed
by integrating statistical testing with snapshot-based replay
mechanisms.
Because the avalanche effect is an intrinsic characteristic
of any secure encryption algorithms, the existence of
avalanche effect is unavoidable during a victim data
encryption attack. Informally, avalanche effect means that
“each output bit is flipped with a probability of 0.50 when
one bit in input is flipped”. In principle, if an attacker is using
secure ciphers, the avalanche effect cannot be avoided even if
the attacker adopted unknown ciphers or code obfuscation.
Unfortunately, there are several daunting challenges when
one intends to check whether the avalanche effect exists in
adversarial settings. By “adversarial settings”, we mean that
the ransomware author is aware of the detection mechanism
and strongly motivated to adversarially change the program
code and/or behavior in such a way that confuses (e.g.,
triggers lots of false positives) the detection mechanism.
First, in adversarial settings the input and output data (i.e.,
bits and bytes) of an encryption loop cannot be guaranteed to
be identified at 100% accuracy, and therefore the avalanche
effect
detection
mechanism
must
tolerate
inaccurately
identified input & output. Second, in order to robustly
detect avalanche effect, the phenomenon of “flipped with a
probability of 0.50” needs to be confirmed with statistical
guarantees. That means we will need to reproduce this
phenomenon through running the encryption loop multiple
times in order to reach a statistical significant conclusion.
However, no real-world malware analysis procedure takes
this (statistical test) requirement into consideration. Third,
since we are detecting avalanche effect in adversarial settings,
we must achieve resilience against adversarial evasion.
Instead of directly addressing these challenges, CipherXRay
(1), the only existing work in adversarial settings, takes the
strategy of checking whether certain “ripple effect” (i.e.,
a necessary but non-sufficient condition) of the avalanche
effect exists. Specifically, it checks the following ripple
effect: if the avalanche effect exists, then every bit in
the ciphertext should have been tainted from every bit
in the plaintext with negligible probability of exceptions.
However, this ripple effect detection can be evaded easily:
ransomware authors can insert numerous pairs of mutually
neutralizing buffers, a specific example of data flow based
counterattack, into the code of a ransomware sample to
trigger CipherXRay to raise an unacceptable number of false
alarms before reporting any true positive. The counterattack
details will be presented shortly in Section Data flow based
counterattack against CipherXRay and evaluated in Section
Resilience to Data Flow Based Counterattack. (Note that this
counterattack is discovered by us.)
In this work, we ensure that what is being checked is
the avalanche effect itself, not a ripple effect. To achieve
this goal, a key insight is as follows: It is possible
to employ a novel record-and-replay mechanism to meet
the specific requirements of statistical-test-based avalanche
effect detection while tolerating inaccurate input & output
identification.
Following this insight, our detection method has three
phases. During Phase I, we use heuristics to achieve input
& output identification. During Phase II, we employ the
aforementioned novel mechanism to check whether an output
bit is crypto-related. Only the crypto-related bits will enter
the next phase. During Phase III, we conduct the Shapiro-
Wilk normality test (13) which allows us to know whether
an input bit is associated with avalanche effect. Based on the
testing outcomes, we use a specific threshold on the minimum
number of input bits that pass the test to determine whether
the avalanche effect exists at the loop level.
In summary, we made the following contributions:
• We present the first approach that can spot encryption
loops
in
adversarial
settings
directly
based
on
Prepared using TRR.cls

3
avalanche effect. Our approach can potentially enable
the analyst to save a lot of time when fulfilling a critical
ransomware reverse engineering task.
• We proposed a novel technique to ensure that what
is being checked is the avalanche effect itself, not a
ripple effect. In particular, we developed a record-and-
replay mechanism to meet the specific requirements
of statistical-test-based avalanche effect detection. The
corresponding toolchain is fully implemented.
• The experiment results show that our tool is highly
effective. It achieves 0.0% FNR and 1.1% FPR
when the evaluation is conducted in a controlled lab
environment. When our tool is employed to reverse
engineer real-world ransomware samples, it succeeds
in analyzing all the ransomware samples selected from
ten representative families. On average, our tool detects
3.2 encryption loops for each ransomware sample.
• We systematically analyzed the resilience of our
approach against adversarial evasion. For example,
when our tool is confronted with the aforementioned
data
flow-based
counterattack,
which
can
cause
numerous failures to CipherXRay (1), our tool is not
affected at all by the attack.
Background
Avalanche Effect
Avalanche Effect (14) is one of the desirable properties of
cryptographic functions with good quality. In simpler terms,
it refers to the phenomenon where even slight modifications
to the input of a cryptographic function result in significant
changes to the output. Formally, if we consider a function,
denoted as f, with an input variable of m bits and an output
variable of n bits, the strict avalanche effect is satisfied
when, for any randomly chosen inputs, flipping a single input
bit will cause each of the n output bits to change with a
50% probability. The formal definition of the strict avalanche
effect can be stated as follows:
Definition 1. Strict Avalanche Effect: Consider two m-bits
inputs X and X′, such that they differ only in bit i, 1 ≤i ≤
m. Let Vi = Y ⊕Y ′, where Y = f(X), Y ′ = f(X′) and f
is a given m × n function. If for all possible input pairs
X and X′ and 1 ≤i ≤m, the probability that each bit in
Vi equals to 1 is 0.50, then we say function f has strict
avalanche effect.
In the literature, it is recognized that the avalanche effect
is observed not only between the plaintext and the resulting
ciphertext but also between the key and the ciphertext in
most public-key ciphers and block ciphers. However, in the
case of stream ciphers, typically, the avalanche effect is only
observed between the key and the expanded key stream in
stream ciphers.
Encryption in Ransomware
Cryptographic functions play a critical role in ransomware
attacks. Modern ransomware typically takes a three-step
encryption procedure: the first step is to generate a randomly
generated RSA key by RSA algorithm with the built-
in RSA key. The second step is to encrypt a randomly
generated symmetric encryption key by RSA algorithm with
the randomly generated RSA key. Moreover, the third step is
to encrypt victim’s files by a symmetric encryption algorithm
with the randomly generated symmetric encryption key.
According
to
(15),
some
of
the
most
widespread
ransomware in recent years, such as CryptoLocker,
CryptoWall, Locky, Cerber, and WannaCry, have
used block ciphers such as AES to encrypt the victims’ files.
Alternatively, some ransomware may use stream ciphers such
as RC4 or Salsa20 to encrypt victim files. However, stream
ciphers may be more susceptible to cryptanalysis if the key
stream or nonce is repeated (16). Therefore, block ciphers
have been dominating in real-world ransomware samples.
Motivation, Problem Statement and Overview
Avalanche effect is an intrinsic property of cryptographic
functions. In the literature, it is not a new idea to use the
property to assess the strength of a newly designed cipher
(17–20); however, checking whether the avalanche effect
exists in adversarial settings is largely uninvestigated. To our
best knowledge, CipherXRay (1) is the only prior work that
uses the property to distinguish cryptographic functions from
non-crypto functions in an adversarial setting. Unfortunately,
what is checked in (1) is not the avalanche effect itself, but
a ripple effect of the property. Since only a ripple effect is
checked, it is not very surprising that CipherXRay can be
easily evaded. Thus, checking whether the avalanche effect
exists in adversarial settings is still an open problem.
In this section, we first present a counterattack against
CipherXRay. Then we use the counterattack to motivate this
open problem. Finally, we give our insights on addressing the
new challenges and a quick overview of our approach.
Data flow based counterattack against
CipherXRay
In particular, the "ripple effect" of the avalanche effect used
in CipherXray is essentially a taint propagation pattern: every
bit in the ciphertext should have been tainted from every bit
in the plaintext with negligible probability of exceptions (1).
Although using the taint propagation pattern is time-
saving, what is checked is not the avalanche effect itself. In
fact, the taint propagation pattern proposed in CipherXRay
guarantees neither the presence of avalanche effect nor the
presence of cryptography operations. Therefore, encryption
detection method in CipherXray is vulnerable to data
flow based counterattack. Here we propose such one data
flow based Counterattack: as shown in Code 1, this is
Prepared using TRR.cls

4
Transportation Research Record XX(X)
a legitimate matrix multiplication loop. To CipherXRay,
those are malicious crypto operations. Every byte in the
result buffer res will be tainted by buffer A and buffer B,
which are the two buffers inserted into the code. However,
Code 1 matches the taint propagation pattern suggested by
CipherXRay, no avalanche effect exists, as we will illustrate
in Section Resilience to Data Flow Based Counterattack.
Consequently, this example implies that attackers can craft
a huge variety of mutually neutralizing buffers to deceive and
deteriorate the effectiveness of CipherXRay with ease.
1
int main() {
2
int A[3][2] = {{1, 2}, {3, 4}, {5, 6}};
3
int B[2][4] = {{7, 8, 9, 10},
4
{11, 12, 13, 14}};
5
int res[3][4];
6
int i, j, k;
7
8
for(i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
9
for(j = 0; j < 4; j++) {
10
res[i][j] = 0;
11
for(k = 0; k < 2; k++)
12
res[i][j] += A[i][k] * B[k][j];
13
}
14
}
15
}
Code 1: An example of Data Flow based Counterattack.
Root causes of the limitation. We observe two main
causes for the limited effectiveness of CipherXRay in
ransomware analysis: Cause 1: Detection through taint
analysis ignores values of variables, despite the fact that
avalanche effect is defined upon the variations in values.
Cause 2: Proposed ripple effect (i.e., presence of the taint
pattern), albeit formally proven (1), is only necessary but
not a sufficient condition of avalanche effect. Philosophically,
detection through necessary conditions only is inherently
vulnerable to evasion attacks.
Problem Statement
The mutually neutralizing buffers insertion attack is shown in
Code 1 against CipherXRay indicates that checking whether
the avalanche effect exists through detection of a ripple effect
is inherently vulnerable to evasion attacks.
In this work, we seek to make sure that what is being
checked is the avalanche effect itself. Prior to examining
the specific challenges presented by adversarial settings, it
is prudent to review the methodologies employed to address
this problem in benign settings.
Checking whether the avalanche Effect exists in benign
settings.
Strict avalanche effect defined in Definition 1
implies the probability of each bit in ciphertext being flipped
is 50%, when one arbitrary bit in plaintext is flipped. Based
on this definition, a practical way to check whether the
avalanche effect exists is through measuring the expectation
of the percentage of bits in the ciphertext. Formally, let’s
denote whether a bit at an arbitrary position i of ciphertext
C of length n is flipped as yi ∈Y , which is an i.i.d. Bernoulli
random variable with p = 0.5. So that:
yi ∼Bernoulli (p = 0.5)
(1)
where the probability of the bit is flipped is P (yi = 1). The
expectation of yi is E (yi) = 0.5. In order to check whether
the avalanche effect exists, we have a new random variable
describing the total number of bits flipped in the ciphertext C
denoted as A, so that:
A =
n
X
i=1
yi
(2)
Thus, the expectation of the total number of flipped bits
E (A) is:
E (A) = E
 n
X
i=1
yi
!
=
n
X
i=1
E (yi) =
n
X
i=1
0.5 = 0.5n (3)
Consequently, if avalanche effect exists, the expectation of
the percentage of the bits in the ciphertext that are flipped
is 50%, because:
E (A)
n
= 0.5n
n
= 0.5 = 50%
(4)
Although the i.i.d. assumption may not hold for some
real-world algorithms, it aligns with the bit independence
criterion of strict avalanche effect for perfectly secured
cipher. Therefore, as shown in the proof above, in most real-
world cases, when an analyst tests whether a cryptography
algorithm bears avalanche effect, they could flip one bit in
the inputs, and test whether the percentage of flipped bits
in ciphertext is close to 50%. By repeating this experiment
multiple times (e.g., more than 30 input bits), a statistically
significant conclusion could be reached.
Technical challenges in adversarial settings.
Unfor-
tunately, measuring avalanche effect as described above is
challenging in case of ransomware. First, during ransomware
execution, the plaintext and ciphertext buffers are not guar-
anteed to be discovered, as the ransomware author can adopt
obfuscation techniques to hide or split the buffers. Second,
any false positive and false negative results in detecting the
input and output buffers used in the encryption could be
disastrous to the final measurement (i.e., the percentage of
bits being flipped), which can lead to catastrophic failure in
terms of the avalanche effect detection.
Based
on
the
above
discussions,
we
must
ensure
that the solution has two properties: P1: It should not
assume that continuous input and output buffer are easily
located; P2: It should directly monitor variations in
values instead of monitoring a ripple effect (e.g., via
necessary condition). Therefore, multiple executions of the
cryptography operations become necessary. An intuitive
solution would be similar to fuzzing: running the programs
Prepared using TRR.cls

5
Execution
Trace
Snapshot
Loops
Ransomware
Tracer
Loop Detector
Input/Output
Identification
Replay
Avalanche Effect 
Detection
Figure 2. Approach Overview.
multiple times with bit-flipped inputs. However, this intuitive
solution become less practical when analyzing ransomware
due to several obstacles: Obstacle 1: The scalability is poor
due to the uncertain execution time; Obstacle 2: The inputs
of ransomware are not controllable, and the inputs to the
encryption routines are also not controllable, making the bit
flipping impractical.
Approach Overview
To tackle the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
record-replay workflow to identify encryption operations in
binary ransomware samples. In particular, we aim to spot
encryption loops. Spotting encryption routines at loop level
is a common strategy in previous works (9, 10) due to several
reasons. Loop, on one hand, is a smaller scope which can be
repeatedly executed; on the other hand, loops are inevitable
in any practical encryption implementation.
As shown in Figure 2, our workflow includes the following
important steps: Ransomware samples are first traced to
get instruction level execution trace and its corresponding
snapshot (e.g., .dll, .data). Then, loops are detected
from the execution trace, generating execution traces for
each loop (i.e., loop traces). Given loop traces, a set
of inputs and outputs are pinpointed, using heuristics of
memory access patterns. Loop traces are then replayed
multiple times using different inputs. (Note that due to
adversarial code obfuscation, we no longer know the
mapping relationships between the pinpointed inputs/outputs
and the plaintext/ciphertext.) Since only the loop body is
replayed, we restore the snapshot of the machine state just
before the execution of the first instruction in the loop to
make replay much more efficient and stable. For each round
of replay, inputs are varied by flipping only one bit, and the
changes in outputs are recorded. Finally, recorded change in
outputs will be further analyzed using statistical testing to
determine whether avalanche effect exists in each loop.
Methodology
Recording Execution Traces
The ransomware samples are executed in a customized
PyReBox Sandbox (21). We have developed a tracer based
on PyReBox which will record all the instructions executed.
For each individual instruction, The trace logs are collected
in the following format:
1
Trace := <address>;<instr>;<raw bytes>;
2
<EAX>,<EBX>,<ECX>,<EDX>,<EBP>,<ESP>;
3
<read addr>,<read size>,<read val>;
4
<write addr>,<write size>,<write val>;
where <instr> is the disassembled instruction (e.g., push
ebp). <raw bytes> denotes the binary data of the
instruction (e.g., 0x55). <EAX> and other register tags
denote the values of the registers before this instruction
is executed. The rest of the instruction log is memory
operations, including the address, size and the values of the
memory read & write by the instruction.
Additionally, we dump all the loaded modules along
with their names, size, and base addresses. This enables
us to remove those candidate loops whose instructions are
all inside known system libraries that do not contain any
crypto functions. In addition, the data sections (e.g., .data,
.rdata) will be loaded into the memory before the replay
as part of our snapshot reconstruction.
Loop Detection
Some previous works detect loops by investigating repeated
instruction sequences in the execution trace (9, 10), which
would be effective for simple loops without any branches.
However, this strategy could produce many false negatives
when trying to identify loops in real-world programs,
including cryptography libraries. This is primarily due to
the presence of branching statements within loops: different
branches result in different instruction sequences.
In lieu of the loop detection method used by previous
works, we detect the loops by monitoring basic blocks that
are previously executed in the execution trace. Since this
method detects loops at basic block level, not only faster it is,
but also can detect loops that have taken different branches
Prepared using TRR.cls

6
Transportation Research Record XX(X)
during the execution. The detail of our loop detection method
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Loop Detection Algorithm
Require: B ←{b1, b2, b2, ...}
▷Executed Basic Blocks
1: S ←{}
▷Stack of Frames
2: L ←{}
▷Loop Head Results
3: for all b in B do
4:
if b ends with ret then
5:
S.pop()
6:
else if b ends with call then
7:
F ←{b}
▷New frame
8:
S ←S.push(F)
9:
end if
10:
F ←S.top()
11:
if b in F then
▷Loop Detected
12:
L ←{b, L}
▷Save Detected Loop
13:
while F.top() ̸= b do
14:
F.pop()
15:
end while
16:
else
17:
F.push(b)
▷Push b to F
18:
end if
19: end for
20: return L
In Algorithm 1, the input is a sequence of basic blocks
B executed in the trace. The basic blocks are identified by
partitioning the trace at branching instructions (e.g., jmp,
call, ret). In order to detect loops with function calls in
the loop body, the stack of frames S is introduced to save
stack frames F, which contains executed basic blocks b. As
shown in line 4-9, if the basic block ends with ret, stack
frame S will pop the top basic block b. If the basic block
ends with call, stack frame S will append the basic block b
to contain basic blocks of the callee function.
Based on the previously mentioned basic block identifi-
cation method (i.e., partitioning at branching instructions),
potentially there exist two basic blocks that end with the same
instruction but start with different instructions. In the context
of loop detection, these basic blocks should be considered as
one basic block. Thus, the loop detector can detect a loop
with different branches. Details are shown in line 10-18. If
the basic block b exists in the new stack frame F, a loop is
detected in this case. Then, it saves the detected loop header
to L and pops all the basic block b until it is the loop header
that is previously found (line 13-15).
Input & Output Identification
In order to check whether the avalanche effect exists in a
loop, we need to examine the relation between the inputs
and outputs of the loop. Therefore, the first step is to identify
the inputs and outputs of a loop. Since our target loops are
encryption loops, we assume both inputs and outputs of the
loops are all memory locations. Thus, one intuitive strategy
is to first pinpoint the locations and size of the buffers, and
then conduct taint analysis to find which ones are inputs
and which ones are outputs, respectively. However, buffer
detection in binary cannot be taken for granted, especially
under adversarial scenarios.
Instead, we propose a set of heuristics based on a three-
step filter to identify the inputs and outputs. The idea is
that we first find a superset of the inputs and outputs,
then gradually remove some irrelevant bytes inside them.
Specifically, we identify inputs and outputs using 3 filters:
Filter 1: all memory read are inputs and all memory write
are outputs; Filter 2: all constant values during the executions
are removed; Filter 3: all obvious pointer values (e.g., used a
dereferencing memory locations) are excluded.
1
movzx
esi, byte [kptr+4*KS_LEN] ;input pointer
2
lea
tptr, [rel enc_tab]
;load S-Box
3
mov
eax, [esi+0*4]
;input
4
mov
ebx, [esi+1*4]
;input
5
mov
ecx, [esi+2*4]
;input
6
mov
edx, [esi+3*4]
;input
7
mov
ebp,[esp+ctx+stk_spc]
;key pointer
8
movzx
edi,byte [ebp+4*KS_LEN]
;load key
Code 2: A section of AES encryption x86 Assembly code.
Filter 1. We first scan the memory operations of all the
executed instructions in a loop trace, marking all the bytes
that have been read from as input bytes, and all the bytes
that have been written to as output bytes. Code 2 shows
an example of detecting input in a AES encryption loop.
Note that a byte could be both input and output. This is
particularly common when the crypto function performs in-
place encryption, i.e., the crypto function reads the plaintext,
performs cryptographic transformations on it, and writes
the ciphertext to the same buffer. The marked input and
output bytes will form candidate sets of input and output,
respectively.
In such way, the identified input/output bytes are very
inclusive. For example, in Code 2, regardless of local or
global, all read variables, including values from S-Box,
keys, etc., are considered as input candidates. The advantage
is that it is not likely we are going to miss any data that
is related to the avalanche effect, including plaintext, keys,
ciphertext, etc. The disadvantage is that many bytes that
are irrelevant to the avalanche effect may be included. For
example, the loop counter i is marked as both output and
input because it will be compared with a target value and
updated during each iteration.
Filter 2. In the candidate set of input, there could exist
bytes holding constant values. In principle, those bytes with
constant values should not be altered during the replay,
as altering them could cause unexpected consequences. To
remove the constant values, we correlate the input/output
information across all the iterations of a loop. If an input
memory byte always holds the same value, we consider it
Prepared using TRR.cls

7
to be a constant and remove it from the candidate set. For
example, in previous filter 1, the S-box entries in Code 2
will be identified as an input candidate. Since the S-box
entries will never be changed during the execution, they will
be filtered out here. This consequence is indeed desirable,
as detecting avalanche effect by modifying S-box entries
is inappropriate. Certainly, some of the input bytes, such as
input bytes in the plaintext buffer and key buffer, could appear
to be constant from the perspectives of a loop, but as long
as the data in those buffers are transferred to other memory
locations during the execution, there will exist non-constant
input bytes holding the data being detected.
Filter 3. Instructions access memory to read not only data
to be processed, but also pointers. Keep in mind that our goal
is to detect avalanche effect, and therefore altering pointers
has no merit at all. In fact, in case pointers are identified as
inputs, changing them in our replays may produce negative
effects. For example, altering a function pointer will directly
lead to replay failure. Therefore, we need to correctly
In particular, since our experiments are all conducted
on X86 architecture, we adopted a brute-force heuristic: if
a memory read that is 4-byte long and is never changed
throughout different iterations of the loop, then this memory
location will be a pointer suspect, and therefore will be
excluded from the input candidate set. Certainly, this will
produce false positives and false negatives, but as long as
there are inputs related to avalanche effect left in the input
candidate set, our method is not affected.
As with any heuristic-based method, there would be corner
cases that our heuristics cannot handle, but fortunately,
this exclusion strategy will at least include enough of the
true positive input and output bits for our avalanche effect
detection to be functional. This way, as long as our avalanche
effect detection method can tolerate some false positive input
and output bits, the avalanche effect in the loop will not be
omitted.
The three filters built using heuristics mainly focus on
encryption loops, based on two assumptions: 1) input and
output locations are designated before executing the loop
body, and 2) output locations are independent of the input
values. Therefore, our input and output identification is
nothing close to perfection, but it will work reasonably well
for the detection of encryption loops in ransomware, as will
be shown in our experiments.
Snapshot-based Replay
As shown in Figure 2, upon identifying the input and output
bytes, our workflow will enter the Replay stage. The replay
of the loop will start at the snapshot just before the start of the
loop, which is reconstructed using the traces. Since the replay
is at loop level, we adopted Unicorn CPU emulator (22).
Snapshot Construction. Without a correct snapshot of the
program state before the execution of the loop body never can
avalanche effect be detected, because an incorrect snapshot
may lead to different input values (i.e., S-box), causing the
vanishing of avalanche effect. Reconstruction of snapshot
involves both the CPU context and memory. Restoring the
CPU context is not complicated, as the general register
values are saved before the execution of each instruction.
However, restoring memory is harder, as memory locations
accessed may vary from the original execution when inputs
are mutated.
To restore the memory, we mimic the executable loading
process, so that all the sections in the loaded images (i.e., PE
files for Windows Ransomware) will be loaded to the proper
memory location based on the base addresses recorded during
the execution. Then, we update the memories based on the
execution trace until the first instruction of the target loop.
Trace Replay For the purpose of detecting avalanche
effect, we replay the loop in the CPU emulator with different
inputs. The replay process is rather straightforward as we
have all the instructions recorded except for the instructions
executed in kernel mode. Thus, without any special handling
will not system calls be functional.
We have only handled some common system calls such as
memory allocation, so that it will no longer allocate a new
buffer, but always return the same memory address as it did
during the tracing. Nevertheless, this is not a great concern as
our replay is only at loop level, where not many system call
will be used. During our experiment, we rarely have replay
failure due to the improper handling of system calls.
Avalanche Effect Detection
As discussed in Section Problem Statement, given a loop
with input and output identified, the most intuitive method
to check avalanche effect would be flipping each input bit
and then checking whether about 50% of the output bits are
flipped. Could this phenomenon be observed for different
input bits, the avalanche effect is found. However, this
intuitive method faces two challenges: (Challenge 1) Our
input and output identification heuristics make no guarantee
that the identified bits are crypto-related. Accordingly, the
intuitive method may suffer from false negative: if an input
bit is not crypto-related, flipping it will not render avalanche
effect in the output bit; if an output bit is not crypto-related,
then the percentage of bits flipped when input changes will
stray away from 50%. (Challenge 2) Even if input and
output bits are all crypto-related, a quantitative method is still
missing to evaluate the fact that “about 50% of the bits are
flipped”.
Thus, a desirable avalanche effect detection method for
loops should work well even if not all the identified input
and output bits are encryption-related. Furthermore, due
to the inherent randomness of output bit flipping in the
presence of avalanche effect, the detection method should be
based on statistical tests. We have formalized our avalanche
Prepared using TRR.cls

8
Transportation Research Record XX(X)
effect detection algorithm in Algorithm 2, whose details are
elaborated in the following subsections.
Algorithm 2 Avalanche Effect Detection
Require: Input bits I, Output bits O, Threshold θ
1: for n ∈[1, 30] do
2:
Xn ←RandomInit(I); ▷Random values to input
bits
3:
StopState ←Replay(Xn)
4:
Yn ←ReadOutput(StopState, O) ▷Output values
5:
for each i ∈I do
6:
(Xn)i ←Flip(Xn, i); ▷Input with bit i flipped
7:
StopState ←Replay((Xn)i);
8:
(Yn)i ←ReadOutput(StopState, O)
9:
end for
10: end for
11:
12: for each i ∈I do
13:
(O)i ←AvaOutputBits(O, {(Y1)i, (Y2)i, ..., (Y30)i})
14:
(cn)i ←CountFlippedBits(Yn, (Yn)i, (O)i);
15: end for
16:
17: Count ←0
▷Avalanche Input Bits Counter
18: for all i ∈I do
19:
isNormal ←NormalTest({(c1)i, (c2)i, ..., (c30)i})
20:
if isNormal then
21:
Count ←Count + 1
22:
end if
23: end for
24:
25: if Count >= θ then
26:
return Avalanche Effect Detected
27: end if
28: return Avalanche Effect Not Detected
Eliminating non-crypto output bits As stated in Challenge
1, the input bits and output bits identified in a cryptography
loop are not necessarily all crypto-related. Thus, before
trying
to
detect
avalanche
effect,
it
is
necessary
to
exclude output bits that are not crypto-related as many as
possible. According to the Strict Avalanche Effect defined in
Definition 1, only in about half of the replay trials should
each output bit be flipped. Based on this criterion, after
completing all the replay trials, we exclude all the output bits
that are flipped either too often or too seldom, so that only
the rest of the output bits considered in further analysis. The
exclusion strategy is rather conservative: those output bits
whose number of times flipped falls outside the interquartile
range of number of trails (i.e., between 7 to 23 times for
30 trials) are excluded. This exclusion step is reflected in
Algorithm 2 at line 13.
Testing input bits individually To address the other aspect
of Challenge 1, specifically to eliminate the effect of input
bits that are not crypto-related, we focus on each input bit
separately. That being said, each input bit is flipped to test
whether it is an Avalanche Input Bit, by replaying the loop
and monitoring the output bits. However, the problem with
this strategy is that a single input bit by itself can only be
flipped and tested once, as a single bit can only have two
possible values (i.e., 0 and 1). Unfortunately, testing the input
bit only once is never robust, as with a small chance that
approximately 50% of the output bits are flipped in that one
replay run. Besides, very few output bits that are not crypto-
related could remain after the previous effort, which will
further undermining the robustness of the test.
Therefore, each input bit has to be flipped multiple times,
and accordingly we have developed a repla

[…middle truncated for length…]


9408
11712
9271
des_cbc-1
20880
8128
20778
In contrast, regarding the negative samples, our tool did
not perform perfectly: Out of 236 negative samples, 3 of
them are reported to have avalanche effect, rendering a 1.1%
false positive rate. After examining the false positives, we
found that all of them are complicated loops, involving
numerous branches (e.g., if-else). In every false positive
case, the identified inputs can significantly affect the control
flow of the loop and thus the code executed. Consequently,
when these input values are modified, the output location
will change. Recall our input/output detection is based on
memory operations, and therefore by “output location”, we
are referring to the memory locations detected to be the
output.
Fidelity Study of Snapshot Construction
Based on our experiment, during the replay of the loop, the
avalanche effect can no longer be detected even if 5% of
the memory in the snapshot are randomized. Therefore, one
premise of our record-replay workflow is that the replays
would achieve high-fidelity.
Our idea to verify the snapshot reconstruction is as follows:
Starting from the same reconstructed snapshot, we execute
the the same loop body on not only a real processor but
also our replay emulator. The execution will stop at the
first instruction outside the loop. We conclude our snapshot
reconstruction is high-fidelity only if the non-reserved
registers (i.e., general registers and EFLAGS register) from
both real processor and emulator are identical.
Following this idea, we created three benign programs
that contain cryptographic loops (i.e., loops with Avalanche
Effect), including loops in md5, des_cbc, and aes_cfb.
For each program, we inserted 4 "breakpoints" into selected
cryptographic loops and in total we have 599 breakpoints.
Using different inputs (by manipulating memory), we
observe that in all 599 breakpoints, the values of all non-
reserved registers in both real processor and emulator are
consistent.
Encryption Loop Detection in Ransomware
To collect ransomware traces, we build a tracer on top of the
PyRebox sandbox.
First, we executed the ransomware in the sandbox with
decoy files deployed. Before the tracing starts, we monitor
all the ransomware processes and hook the API call related
to file read/write (e.g., ZwWriteFile). Only after the
disk read/write of decoy files is observed will we start
the tracing on the corresponding process. This strategy
minimizes the amount of tracing time. Then, the tracer will
start recording the trace as described in Section Recording
Execution Traces. Since the encryption may be executed in
a multi-thread manner, the tracer will record execution traces
for all threads, generating a separate trace file for each thread.
Finally, the tracer stops when the disk write of the encrypted
file is observed, ensuring that the recorded trace contains
encryption loops. Before the tracer stops, all loaded libraries
(e.g., .dll) are dumped, and their base addresses are saved
for further snapshot construction.
To save the analysis time, some loops can be skipped.
There are several criteria to filter out a loop: 1) It is in a
known system library (e.g., user32.dll); 2) it contains
inner encryption loops identified already.
As shown in Table 2, we select 10 ransomware samples
out of 10 distinct families of ransomware. Note that here we
exclude those potential crypto-hashing loops. To filter out
these hash loops, we count the average number of bitwise
AND and OR operations per loop iteration, discarding loops
with more than 5 such operations as they are likely to
be hash loops rather than encryption loops. For all the
Prepared using TRR.cls

11
tested ransomware samples, all the crypto loops identified
by our tool are correct, and zero false positives and false
negatives are observed. On average, 3.2 encryption loops
were detected for each ransomware sample. We manually
verified every loop that our toolchain reported as positive. To
verify an encryption loop, we first check whether the loop is
from dynamically loaded libraries. If it is from encryption
functions from libraries that contain known encryption
functions (e.g., ADVAPI32.dll, Cryptbase.dll), we
confirm that it is an encryption loop. In case the loop is not
from libraries, we then perform manual checks, instruction
by instruction. We focus on the opcodes and memory
operations. It can be seen that real-world ransomware is
more complex and challenging as reflected by the number
of candidate loops (see Section Recording Execution Traces,
Loop Detection. On average, the total number of candidate
loops for each ransomware sample is 35.7. Nevertheless, the
experiments indicate that our toolchain is able to handle the
workload. Among all the samples, we have two interesting
observations: Observation 1: Most ransomware samples
employ encryption algorithms implemented in a library (e.g.,
Advapi32.dll, Crypt32.dll). Observation 2: We
have identified the presence of an encryption loop within
the Avoslocker executable (i.e., not in any library). This
observation leads us to believe that the loop is associated with
string encryption, as it exhibits certain string manipulation
operations (e.g., bswap).
Table 2. Encryption detection result in Ransomware.
Name
Family
No of
Loop
Enc.
Loop
Filtered
Loop
FP
84c8
WannaCry
6
3
3
0
01c6
Babuk
1
1
0
0
0b1f
AvosLocker
164
6
66
0
c249
HelloKitty
60
6
15
0
008e
Makop
52
5
10
0
1a05
Dharma
8
2
1
0
1f1a
Rapid
1
1
0
0
70fa
GlobeImposter
37
3
0
0
8be4
MoneyMessage
11
2
0
0
73ca
ItsSoEasy
17
3
4
0
Resilience to Data Flow Based Counterattack
One key motivation of our work is to tackle the limitation of
CipherXray (1), which also leverages the Avalanche effect to
detect encryption functions. As elaborated in Section Data
flow based counterattack against CipherXRay, CipherXray
tries to check whether the Avalanche effect exists through
taint analysis across buffers, which could be evaded in
adversarial settings. We have proposed a data flow based
counterattack in Code 1 that should evade CipherXray. To test
this hypothesis, we first create a program sample by injecting
several encryption loops (i.e., loops with avalanche effect),
as well as the loops in Code 1 (i.e., loops without avalanche
effect). Then we investigate whether CipherXray and our tool
report the Avalanche effect from the injected loops.
Regarding the implementation of CipherXray, since the
authors released neither the source code nor the binary
of their tool, we re-implement their encryption function
detection algorithm using Intel PIN and Triton (23). To
collect the trace of the injected loops, we first use Intel PIN
to collect the execution trace, and then extract each injected
loop. Given the trace of each injected loop, we conduct the
taint analysis as described in CipherXray using Triton. Based
on our observation, when all the bytes in either buffer A or
buffer B (see Code 1) are tainted, all 48 bytes in res are also
tainted. This observation is aligned with our hypothesis, and
therefore, CipherXray shall report this loop as an encryption
loop, which is a false positive.
In contrast, our tool reports no Avalanche effect from the
loops in Code 1. Since our method takes values into account,
we repeat the experiments with different values in buffers A
and B. Still, no encryption loop is reported, even though all
48 bytes in res are tainted,
Consequently, when adopting CipherXray in an adversarial
setting, if the attacker is aware of the detection scheme,
he/she can inject hundreds of such loops (into the code of a
ransomware sample) to generate substantial number of false
positives, causing the detection procedure impractical.
Runtime Overhead
The loop detection time is contingent upon the size of the
execution trace. Since our loop detector is operated at basic
block level, the size of execution trace is in terms of the
number of basic blocks. As shown in Table 3, the processing
time for individual loops (i.e., column Loop Detection) is
typically quite short, requiring no more than one second per
loop, indicating a high level of detection efficiency.
Although we replay all the detected loops in one
ransomware sample multiple times, the runtime overhead is
still acceptable thanks to our efficient snapshot construction.
As shown in Table 3, the cumulative time consumption
of detection, encompassing both loop detection and the
replay phase, remains within acceptable bounds for a single
ransomware sample. It becomes evident that as the trace
file size increases, the time required for loop detection
and replay also significantly grows. Given our deliberate
commitment to ensuring that the encryption process is
comprehensively captured within the trace, the trace file has
grown substantially in size. Consequently, optimizing the
tracer holds the potential to enhance the performance of both
the loop detector and the replay process. However, it should
be noted that the pursuit of such optimization falls outside the
purview of this research.
On the other hand, owing to the streamlined and efficient
snapshot construction process, the average duration for
replaying (i.e., column Avg. Replay) a single loop typically
Prepared using TRR.cls

12
Transportation Research Record XX(X)
ranges from 1 to 5 minutes, which is considerably less than
the time required for manual inspection of reverse engineers.
Table 3. Runtime overhead in seconds.
Name
Loop Detection
Avg. Replay
Overall
84c8
133.0
141.30
556.94
01c6
0.3
3730.20
3730.50
0b1f
22.0
66.65
11019.29
c249
18.0
336.10
20172.10
008e
8.0
82.11
4277.95
1a05
1.1
28.54
229.42
1f1a
1.8
32.35
34.15
70fa
5.9
57.16
2121.16
8be4
6.0
184.40
2034.43
73ca
2.7
78.70
1340.60
False Positive Case Study
The first case pertains to cryptographic hashing loops with a
reduced frequency of and, and or opcodes. Note that the
crypto hashing loop also exhibits the avalanche effect. As
mentioned in Section Encryption Loop Detection in Ran-
somware, a heuristic approach—specifically, the calculation
of the mean frequency of bitwise and and or operations per
loop iteration—is employed to identify and exclude crypto-
graphic hashing loops. However, our investigation revealed
that several contemporary cryptographic hash functions have
been optimized for modern CPU architectures. A salient
example is BLAKE3, which is predicated on the ARX (i.e.,
modular Add, Rotate, and XOR) design paradigm, offering
superior performance on modern CPUs. While it does not
completely avoid and, or operations, it uses them less
frequently than some other hash functions. The core mixing
function does not use and, or or at all. Nevertheless, it
is crucial to emphasize that the ineffectiveness of the hash
function filter does not compromise the capability of the
avalanche effect detection mechanism.
The
second
case
is
that
some
compression
loops
are wrongly detected to have the avalanche effect. Our
investigation reveals that this is due to the input/output
misidentification. As shown in Code 3, the function
compress_block takes block as actual input, the final
state as the actual output, and uses a temporary buffer
temp for intermediate calculations. It performs 10 rounds
of mixing operations. Note that, the actual avalanche effect
should only be measured by how this 1-bit change in
block affects the final state after all rounds and the
final XOR. However, the inclusive input/output identification
also considers initial state as input, temp, or intermediate
values of state as outputs. Assume that we change one
bit in the input block, and the change propagates through
the rounds, affecting temp. If temp is considered an
output, large changes in temp during rounds might be
seen as a strong avalanche effect. If intermediate state
values are considered outputs, their changes during rounds
might also be mistaken for avalanche effects. This analysis,
while addressing a rare occurrence, underscores the critical
importance of precise input/output identification in the
evaluation of cryptographic properties.
1
#define BLOCK_SIZE 16
2
#define STATE_SIZE 4
3
4
void compress_block(uint32_t *state,
5
const uint8_t *block) {
6
uint32_t temp[STATE_SIZE];
7
8
// Copy state to temporary buffer
9
for (int i = 0; i < STATE_SIZE; i++) {
10
temp[i] = state[i];
11
}
12
13
// Compression rounds
14
for (int round = 0; round < 10; round++) {
15
// Mix state with input block
16
for (int i = 0; i < STATE_SIZE; i++) {
17
temp[i] += *((uint32_t*)(block + 4*i));
18
temp[i] = (temp[i] << 7) | (temp[i] >> 25);
19
temp[i] ^= temp[(i+1) % STATE_SIZE];
20
}
21
22
// Additional mixing
23
for (int i = 0; i < STATE_SIZE; i++) {
24
temp[i] += temp[(i+1) % STATE_SIZE];
25
temp[i] = (temp[i] << 13) | (temp[i] >> 19);
26
}
27
}
28
29
// Update final state
30
for (int i = 0; i < STATE_SIZE; i++) {
31
state[i] ^= temp[i];
32
}
33
}
Code 3: An example Compression Function.
Related Work
Avalanche Effect Researchers have strived to design and
analyze encryption schemes that exhibit a strong avalanche
effect, as it is a fundamental requirement for ensuring the
confidentiality and integrity of data. Numerous studies (17–
20) have focused on evaluating and enhancing the avalanche
effect in cryptographic systems to resist various attacks,
such as differential and linear cryptanalysis (24, 25). Classic
ciphers like the Data Encryption Standard (DES) and more
modern algorithms like the Advanced Encryption Standard
(AES) have been extensively analyzed and praised for their
strong avalanche properties (26, 27). It should be noticed
that our work is clearly different from these works: they all
evaluate and enhance the avalanche effect in benign settings;
in contrast, our work has to measure avalanche effect in
adversarial settings.
Prepared using TRR.cls

13
Crypto Function Detection Crypto functions are usually
detected by both static (11, 12, 28) and dynamic (1, 9, 10, 29–
31) analysis. The approaches to detect crypto functions can
be split into two categories: Code-similarity-based (9, 10)
and signature/heuristic-based (1, 11, 29–31). (29) and (30)
trace this system execution at the production stage and
detect the input-output relationships among viable pairs of
crypto keys, enter buffers, and/or output buffers. (9) proposes
Aligot to identify cryptographic functions retrieving their
parameters in a way that is basically impartial. (10) comes
up with a novel Bit-precise symbol execution to detect
crypto functions and get good performance in obfuscated
programs. By examining program execution traces, k-
hunt (31) discovers improperly produced keys, insecurely
negotiated keys, and recoverable keys.
Discussion and Limitations
Discussions
on
anti
dynamic
analysis To
collect
execution traces from ransomware binaries, the most
common ways are dynamic binary instrumentation (DBI)
and sandbox. Since DBI based tool such as Intel Pin
provide no transparency at all, we build our tracer upon the
PyRebox sandbox. Although it is not perfect, nearly 90%
of the ransomware samples we analyzed can be properly
executed and traced by the dynamic tracer we build. Among
the rest of the 10% ransomware samples we failed to analyze,
most of them are due to inactive C2C servers.
Discussions on program obfuscation One key feature
of our method is to measure real avalanche effect so
that evasion discussed in Section Adversarial Evasion Of
Proposed Method is ineffective. However, our method could
still be vulnerable to adversarial evasions using program
code obfuscations, which is a general problem for program
analysis. Fortunately, many common obfuscation schemes
are ineffective against our design, because: 1) our replay
is based on traces from concrete execution, so obfuscation
schemes targeting static analysis are ineffective; 2) our
analysis is at loop level, and our loop detection is solid as
long as the loop body had been repeatedly executed more
than once. Using the three obfuscation schemes in OLLVM
(i.e., control flow flattening (FLA), instruction substitution
(SUB), and bogus control flow (BCF)) as examples, we
briefly explain why our method can resist them. FLA is
ineffective because it cannot hide loops. As long as loops
can be correctly identified, there is no impact on our method.
SUB is ineffective because our avalanche effect detection is
based on observing the changes in the inputs and outputs, so
that as long as the inputs and outputs are correctly identified,
the exact instructions executed are not our concern. BCF is
ineffective simply because this is an obfuscation for static
analysis so that the bogus control flow will never be taken
during our concrete execution and therefore will not affect
our collected traces.
Discussions on Input & Output identification While
the Input & Output identification method discussed in
Section Input & Output Identification provides heuristics
to discerning inputs and outputs within binary execution
traces, the lack of enough semantic information in binary
and the potential presence of obfuscation techniques may
challenge the accuracy of the identification process. In this
paper, since our Avalanche input bit detection algorithm is
intentionally designed to tolerate inaccurate Input & Output
identification, we adopt a heuristic-based strategy to identify
input and output memory locations. However, as shown in the
experiments, there are some corner cases and we will further
improve the identification method in future work.
Conclusion
We propose a method to detect encryption loops in
adversarial settings, specifically binary-only ransomware
samples. The experiments show that our approach is highly
effective. It achieves 0.0% false negative rate and 1.1%
false positive rate when the evaluation is conducted in a
controlled lab environment. When our tool is employed to
reverse engineer real-world ransomware samples, it succeeds
in analyzing all the ransomware samples selected from ten
representative families. On average, our tool detects 3.2
encryption loops for each ransomware sample.