Synthesizing Multi-Agent Harnesses for Vulnerability Discovery
Hanzhi Liu
University of California, Santa
Barbara
hanzhi@ucsb.edu
Chaofan Shou
Fuzzland
shou@fuzz.land
Xiaonan Liu
Fuzzland
xl@fuzz.land
Hongbo Wen
University of California, Santa
Barbara
hongbowen@ucsb.edu
Yanju Chen
University of California, San Diego
yanju@ucsd.edu
Ryan Jingyang Fang
World Liberty Financial
ryan@worldlibertyfinancial.com
Yu Feng
University of California, Santa
Barbara
yufeng@cs.ucsb.edu
Abstract
LLM agents have begun to find real security vulnerabilities that hu-
man auditors and automated fuzzers missed for decades, in source-
available targets where the analyst can build and instrument the
code. In practice the work is split among several agents, wired to-
gether by a harness: the program that fixes which roles exist, how
they pass information, which tools each may call, and how retries
are coordinated. When the language model is held fixed, changing
only the harness can still change success rates by several-fold on
public agent benchmarks, yet most harnesses are written by hand;
recent harness optimizers each search only a narrow slice of the
design space and rely on coarse pass/fail feedback that gives no di-
agnostic signal about why a trial failed. AgentFlow addresses both
limitations with a typed graph DSL whose search space jointly cov-
ers agent roles, prompts, tools, communication topology, and coordi-
nation protocol, paired with a feedback-driven outer loop that reads
runtime signals from the target program itself to diagnose which
part of the harness caused the failure and rewrite it accordingly. We
evaluate AgentFlow on TerminalBench-2 with Claude Opus 4.6
and on Google Chrome with Kimi K2.5. AgentFlow reaches 84.3%
on TerminalBench-2, the highest score in the public leaderboard
snapshot we evaluate against, and discovers ten previously un-
known zero-day vulnerabilities in Google Chrome, including
two Critical sandbox-escape vulnerabilities (CVE-2026-5280
and CVE-2026-6297).
1
Introduction
Language-model agents have begun to find real security vulnerabil-
ities that human auditors and automated fuzzers missed for decades.
Google’s Big Sleep agent discovered a zero-day memory-corruption
flaw in SQLite (CVE-2025-6965) before attackers could exploit it [5].
Anthropic’s Claude Mythos Preview found a 27-year-old denial-
of-service vulnerability in OpenBSD’s TCP SACK implementation,
crashing any OpenBSD host with two packets [8]. LLM agents
have autonomously hacked real-world websites [16]; teams of LLM
agents have further improved performance on real-world zero-day
web-vulnerability exploitation [48]; and agentic systems have repro-
duced CTF-level exploits from natural-language descriptions [35].
The capability is real and accelerating.
To see where these capabilities come from, and why they are still
limited, it helps to look at how an LLM-based vulnerability finder is
actually put together. In the simplest deployment, a single language
model operates as a security agent: the operator hands it a target
program (the software under analysis, e.g. libtiff, OpenSSL, curl),
gives it a system prompt that states its goal in natural language (“find
a memory-safety vulnerability in the TIFF parsing module”), and
exposes a set of tools: concrete actions the model may invoke at
each step (read source files, compile the target with instrumentation,
execute the binary, inspect output). The agent reasons about the
target, generates candidate inputs, runs them, and observes the
results. This loop of reasoning, tool invocation, and feedback is the
single-agent system.
A single agent has to do everything inside one reasoning trace:
read the target’s validation logic, craft structured inputs that sat-
isfy format checks, run the target, and decide whether what came
back is a real crash. This breaks down for three reasons. First, real
security targets produce voluminous output: a single instrumented
Chrome build emits megabytes of sanitizer and coverage data per
run, quickly exhausting even frontier-scale context windows (on
the order of 200K tokens). Second, when heterogeneous sub-tasks
(source analysis, input crafting, crash triage) compete for the same
context, the model exhibits lost-in-the-middle effects [27]: it drops
earlier analysis, repeats work it already did, and abandons long-
horizon strategies. Third, a single trace cannot explore multiple
hypotheses in parallel; it must commit to one strategy at a time,
and a dead-end wastes the entire budget. These limitations are well
documented in the agent-systems literature [20, 21, 39] and are the
reason that current state-of-the-art systems do not rely on a single
agent.
Production systems instead split the work across specialized
agents, each with its own prompt, LLM model (the underlying
language model assigned to that role), and tools, much like a small
security team: an analyst extracts the preconditions a valid input
must satisfy from the source, an explorer crafts inputs guided by the
analyst’s summary, and a verifier runs the candidate and decides
1
arXiv:2604.20801v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

Hanzhi Liu, Chaofan Shou, Xiaonan Liu, Hongbo Wen, Yanju Chen, Ryan Jingyang Fang, and Yu Feng
whether the resulting behavior counts as a real crash, with the
verifier’s verdict feeding back to the analyst on failure. A team of
three is strictly more powerful than a soloist, but it adds a new
responsibility: someone has to decide which roles exist, who talks
to whom, what information passes along each edge, and when the
team retries.
The agent-systems community refers to the orchestration code
that makes these decisions as the harness [5, 8, 25]: the program
that specifies which agents exist, what prompt each one receives,
what tools each may invoke, how outputs are routed through the
communication graph, and what coordination protocol governs
execution (sequential, parallel, fan-out, retry on failure). Designing
a good harness is the central concern of this paper. On the public
TerminalBench-2 leaderboard [37], three systems run the same
Claude Opus 4.6 model on the same 89 long-horizon tasks but
their pass rates span a 4× range, from 20% to 80% [25]; with the
model held constant, the design choices that remain (orchestration,
prompts, tools, coordination, and feedback channels) account for
the spread. A well-designed harness solves more tasks with fewer
inference calls; a poorly-designed one burns compute on dead-
end strategies and runs into the tens of thousands of dollars per
campaign [5, 8].
Because harness engineering matters this much, recent work
has begun to automate it: instead of hand-tuning the harness, an
outer-loop optimizer runs the current harness, observes how it did,
and proposes a new harness for the next trial. Meta-Harness [25]
rewrites that agent’s prompts, tool bindings, and context-building
code but keeps the team to a single agent. ADAS [21] introduces
new agent code (new roles with new prompts and tool calls) but
keeps the communication graph between agents fixed by a hand-
written controller. AFlow [46] uses a tree search over a fixed library
of predefined workflow operators, restructuring how agents are
wired together but holding the agent pool, the prompts, and the
tools constant. MaAS [45] samples agent teams from a pre-defined
pool but fixes how those agents communicate and hand off control.
Each system improves over hand-designed harnesses on its own
benchmark, yet they share two fundamental limitations.
Narrow scope. Each optimizer searches only a small slice of the
harness design space: Meta-Harness edits prompts and tool bind-
ings within a single agent; ADAS generates new Python controller
code but fixes the communication graph; AFlow picks from a library
of predefined operators; MaAS samples agents but fixes their com-
munication protocol. The reason is tractability: opening the search
space to all harness components simultaneously makes naïve search
intractable. In practice this means they cannot discover solutions
that require cross-component changes (e.g., adding a new agent
and rewiring the communication graph and adjusting its prompt in
a single step), which our evaluation shows are precisely the edits
that separate competitive harnesses from mediocre ones.
Coarse feedback. Existing optimizers typically rely on raw agent
traces or binary pass/fail outcomes as the signal for the next pro-
posal. This “zero or one” feedback provides no fine-grained diag-
nostic information about why a trial failed: whether the agent’s
input never reached the vulnerable function, whether the crash was
masked by an unrelated assertion, or whether the target’s defense
was never exercised. In a large search space, coarse feedback turns
the optimization into a random walk.
These two limitations motivate AgentFlow.
Addressing narrow scope with a typed graph DSL. To search over
all harness components at once, AgentFlow represents every har-
ness as a program in a typed graph DSL: nodes are agents, edges are
dataflow or retry links, and all harness dimensions (agent roles A,
communication topology G, message schemas Σ, tool bindings Φ,
and coordination protocol Ψ) each map to a first-class editable field
in the program. A single optimization step can therefore add a new
agent, rewire the communication graph, adjust the new agent’s
prompt, and restrict its tool set, all as one local rewrite. The ob-
vious risk is that opening the full space makes search intractable.
AgentFlow controls this explosion through a type system over the
graph: before any candidate harness is dispatched for the expensive
LLM evaluation, a well-formedness check verifies that every tem-
plate variable resolves to a declared agent output or feedback chan-
nel, that every edge connects declared agents, and that the graph
is connected. The type system is what makes searching the full
search space tractable: it eliminates structurally broken candidates
cheaply, so the AgentFlow spends its budget only on well-formed
harnesses.
Addressing coarse feedback with runtime diagnostics. Instead of
a binary pass/fail signal, AgentFlow reads structured runtime
feedback from the target program itself (test verdicts, line-level
coverage maps, sanitizer reports), together with each agent’s action
traces and the archive of all prior trials. This information lets the
system localize why a harness failed rather than only that it failed.
For example, a coverage map indicates whether an agent’s input
reached the vulnerable function; a sanitizer trace distinguishes a
benign crash from the memory-safety vulnerability the campaign is
targeting; and the archive of prior trials identifies when a proposed
harness repeats one that was previously evaluated. Each of these
signals provides a concrete lever that a purely binary verdict does
not.
We evaluate AgentFlow on two workloads that differ in domain,
scale, and LLM model. On TerminalBench-2 [37], a public leader-
board of 89 long-horizon terminal tasks, the synthesized harness
reaches 84.3% with Claude Opus 4.6 [3], the highest score among all
publicly-ranked harnesses. On the Google Chrome codebase (over
35 million lines of C/C++), the same synthesis loop, driven by the
open-weight LLM model Kimi K2.5 [23], discovers ten previously
unknown zero-day vulnerabilities, including two Critical sandbox-
escape CVEs (CVE-2026-5280 and CVE-2026-6297), all confirmed
by the vendor through the Chrome Vulnerability Reward Program.
Contributions.
• A typed graph DSL that unifies all harness dimensions into a
single searchable representation, with a type system that keeps
the enlarged space tractable (Section 4).
• A feedback-driven optimization loop that reads runtime signals
from the target (coverage, sanitizer output, action traces) to di-
agnose failures and direct the search (Section 5).
• State-of-the-art results on TerminalBench-2 and Google Chrome,
including ten previously unknown zero-day vulnerabilities, in-
cluding two Critical sandbox escapes (Section 7).
2

Synthesizing Multi-Agent Harnesses for Vulnerability Discovery
Input
// heif_colorconv.cc
void convert_colsp(
Image* in, out) {
int w = in->width;
if (in_a && out_a)
memcpy(dst, src, w*2);
}
libheif
AgentFlow
Propose
Execute & Observe
Score
Diagnose
Iter 1
Harness𝐻0
agent
libheif
stderr
file rejected by parser
× fail
format not satisfied
Iter 2
Harness𝐻1
analyzer
crafter
libheif
coverage
no crash, exit 0
× fail
vuln. branch not reached
Iter 3
Harness𝐻2
analyzer
crafter
verifier
libheif
coverage
ASan
retry
heap-buffer-overflow
✓CVE triggered
PoC
constructed
01001101 10110010
01100101 01001000
00101010 11010110
Output
01001101 10110010
01100101 01001000
00101010 11010110
11001011 01110100
10010110 00111001
01110010 10100011
00011101 11001010
!
libheif
CVE-2020-23109
data flow
optimization
retry
role LLM agent
prog program
obs feedback channel
Figure 1: AgentFlow run on libheif (CVE-2020-23109). Each row is one iteration: propose a harness, execute it, score the
outcome, and diagnose failures. Iteration 1 uses a single agent that produces a malformed input; iteration 2 adds an analyzer
with coverage feedback; iteration 3 adds a verifier with AddressSanitizer and a retry loop, triggering the heap-buffer-overflow.
2
Motivating Example
Before describing AgentFlow in detail, we walk through a con-
crete run of the system on a single target to show how it iteratively
improves the harness using feedback from the target program.
The target is libheif, a widely used reference implementation
of the HEIF/HEVC image format. The vulnerability is a heap-buffer-
overflow in the color conversion logic (CVE-2020-23109): the func-
tion reads an 8-bit alpha plane but hardcodes a 16-bit copy length
(width * 2), causing an out-of-bounds read. Triggering the over-
flow requires two conditions: the file must pass an initial format
constraint check, and the image must contain an 8-bit alpha channel
to trigger the undersized allocation mismatch.
Iteration 1: the file gets thrown out before the bug ever runs. Agent-
Flow starts with one generic agent, prompted with “find a memory-
safety bug in the HEIF parsing module.” The agent generates an
815-byte HEIF file, hands it to the libheif binary, and the binary
exits cleanly with no crash. The binary writes a line to its standard
error stream saying that the input failed an early format check,
and AgentFlow reads that line through the stderr channel. The
agent’s own trace claims it tested the parser; the program’s stderr
shows that the parser rejected the file long before the vulnerable
code ran. The topology at this stage is a single node (Figure 1, Iter 1).
Iteration 2: the right function runs, but the bug is in a deeper
branch. AgentFlow reads the stderr message (“format constraint
not satisfied”) and identifies that the single agent failed at file con-
struction, not at bug triggering: it does not know enough about
HEIF’s on-disk format to write a valid file. The system splits the
work into two agents: an analyzer whose only job is to read the
HEIF parser’s source code and write a short note describing what a
real HEIF file looks like, and a crafter that turns that note into bytes
(Figure 1, Iter 2). On the next trial the two-agent harness produces
an 817-byte file that passes the format check, the parser runs on it,
and again the binary exits without crashing. This time a different
signal is available: line-coverage data (the “coverage” feedback in
Figure 1, Iter 2), which records exactly which source lines the parser
executed during the run. The coverage record shows that the parser
entered the colour conversion function but never took the specific
branch that handles 8-bit alpha. The right function ran; the buggy
branch inside it was never visited.
Iteration 3: edit a real HEIF file instead of inventing one, retry until
something complains, and let a memory checker do the complaining.
AgentFlow adds a third agent, a verifier, downstream of the crafter,
and rewrites two things about the verifier’s prompt. (1) Start from
a real file, not from scratch. Writing a valid HEIF file byte-by-byte
is hard, and the crafter has been spending most of its budget just
keeping the container syntactically legal. Instead the verifier is told
to take a real HEIF image already on disk (a “seed”) and change only
the one field that controls the alpha channel’s bit depth, leaving
every other byte alone. (2) Try, look, tweak, try again, until
something goes wrong (+ retry loop). Instead of running the
binary once and giving up, the verifier is instructed to flip the alpha-
bit-depth field, run the binary, look at the result, adjust the field
again, and repeat until the binary reports an error. The system also
wires a new feedback channel into this verifier: AddressSanitizer
(the “sanitizer” feedback channel in Figure 1, Iter 3), a memory-
error detector that has been compiled into the libheif binary.
AddressSanitizer watches every memory read and write at run time
and reports an error whenever the program touches a byte outside
the buffer the program itself allocated, even when the program
would otherwise have continued without a visible crash. Within
a handful of tweaks the verifier finds an alpha-bit-depth value for
which AddressSanitizer reports an out-of-bounds read at the colour-
conversion function’s memcpy call. The harness has produced a
small, reproducible HEIF file that triggers the heap-buffer-overflow
found in CVE-2020-23109.
3

Hanzhi Liu, Chaofan Shou, Xiaonan Liu, Hongbo Wen, Yanju Chen, Ryan Jingyang Fang, and Yu Feng
What changed. Across three iterations, AgentFlow added two
agents, rewired the communication graph, rewrote prompts to start
from a real file and to keep retrying until the binary complained,
and routed each new signal to whichever agent needed it.
3
Background
3.1
Agents and Harnesses
An agent is a large language model (LLM) equipped with a natural-
language instruction (the system prompt) and a set of tools it may
call (read files, compile binaries, run tests). At each step the model
reads its accumulated context, picks an action, observes the result,
and repeats until the task is done or its context window fills up.
A harness orchestrates one or more agents into a pipeline: it fixes
which agents exist, what prompt and tools each receives, how they
pass information to one another, and when the pipeline retries
on failure. Section 4.1 formalizes the harness as a five-component
tuple.
3.2
Runtime Feedback Channels
When an agent runs a target program, the program can produce
several kinds of observable output beyond a simple pass/fail verdict.
We distinguish four classes of runtime feedback that are relevant
to vulnerability discovery:
(1) Test verdict: whether the target’s own test suite passed or
failed on the agent’s input.
(2) Program stdout/stderr: the raw text the target printed during
execution, including error messages, warnings, and diagnostic
output.
(3) Line and branch coverage: which source-code lines and con-
ditional branches the target actually executed, obtained from
LLVM source-based instrumentation [17]. Coverage reveals
whether the agent’s input reached the code region where a
vulnerability might reside.
(4) Sanitizer reports: runtime error reports from AddressSan-
itizer and UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer [34], which detect
memory-safety violations (buffer overflows, use-after-free) and
undefined-behavior errors even when the program does not
visibly crash.
The first two channels are available in any environment; the last
two require the target to be compiled with instrumentation.
3.3
Vulnerability Discovery as an Agent Task
Vulnerability discovery is a sparse-reward sequential decision prob-
lem: most trials end in failure, and failures carry little diagnostic
information. A harness that never reached the vulnerable func-
tion produces the same pass/fail verdict as one that reached it and
skipped the error-handling branch where the bug resides. Runtime
feedback channels (Section 3.2) can break this ambiguity: coverage
data reveals whether the vulnerable code was reached; sanitizer
output reveals whether a memory error occurred.
3.4
Threat Model
The system is operated by a security analyst on a target whose
source code and build infrastructure are available. The analyst con-
figures the target’s build to emit the runtime feedback channels of
Section 3.2: at minimum the test verdict and stdout/stderr, option-
ally augmented with coverage and sanitizer instrumentation. This is
the standard precondition for source-level security analysis (source-
level audit, coverage-guided fuzzing, sanitizer-instrumented CI) and
is satisfied by every target in Section 7. Target output is delivered
through structured fields (typed verdict, typed sanitizer report)
and freeform stdout/stderr enclosed in fixed delimiters, so that
adversarially-formed target output cannot be parsed as instructions
to the system.
4
Problem Formalization
4.1
Multi-Agent Harnesses
A harness 𝐻is a multi-agent pipeline that wraps one or more lan-
guage models and mediates their interaction with an environment.
We decompose it into five components,
𝐻= (A, G, Σ, Φ, Ψ),
described below.
• A, the agent set. Each agent is a triple (role, 𝜋,𝑚). The role is
a short label describing the agent’s function (e.g. “analyst,” “ex-
plorer,” “verifier”). The system prompt 𝜋is a natural-language
instruction that tells the model what to do, what format to pro-
duce, and what information to pay attention to. The LLM model 𝑚
is the large language model (LLM) that powers the agent, for
example, Claude Opus 4.6 [3] or Kimi K2.5 [23]. Different agents
in the same harness may use different LLM models.
• G ⊆A × A, the communication topology: a directed graph
whose edges determine which agent’s output is visible to which
other agent, and in what order they run.
• Σ, the message schema: for each edge (𝑎,𝑏) ∈G, a template de-
termining what 𝑎’s output passes to 𝑏. Templates may reference
feedback channels (test output, program stdout/stderr, coverage,
sanitizer output) as free variables; which agents reference which
channels is determined by the templates themselves.
• Φ : A →2Tools, the tool allocation: which tools each agent
may invoke (e.g. read source files, compile and run the target,
query a database).
• Ψ, the coordination protocol: how agents are composed: se-
quentially, in parallel, as a fan-out (cloning one agent into 𝑘
independent copies), or in a loop-until-success pattern.
A single-agent system is the trivial case |A| = 1, G = ∅.
Prior work as special cases. Each recent agent-design system fixes
some components of 𝐻and searches the rest.
• Meta-Harness [25]: partially mutates the single agent through
prompt and template edits (Σ; fixed |A| = 1) with G = ∅.
• ADAS [21]: searches A via Python code generation with G
pinned to a hierarchical loop.
• AFlow [46]: searches (G, Ψ) by Monte Carlo tree search over a
homogeneous agent pool.
• MaAS [45]: samples A from a fixed agent pool, with Ψ hardwired
to a routing cascade in which each query is handed off through
a fixed sequence of agents.
Each system exposes a different, narrow set of edits, targeted at
the components it searches: Meta-Harness rewrites prompt and
template text; ADAS emits new Python controller code; AFlow picks
workflow operators from a fixed library; MaAS selects agents from
4

Synthesizing Multi-Agent Harnesses for Vulnerability Discovery
(a) Abstract syntax
Programs
𝑃::= (N, E)
nodes N, edges E
Nodes
𝑛::= agent(𝜌, 𝜋,𝑚,𝜙)
role label 𝜌, prompt 𝜋,
model id 𝑚, tools 𝜙⊆T
| fanout(𝑛,𝑘)
𝑘parallel copies of 𝑛(𝑘∈N+ )
Edges
𝑒::= 𝑛1 →𝑛2
data edge (carries 𝑛1.out to 𝑛2)
| 𝑛1 →𝑔𝑛2
guarded edge (fires only when 𝑛1’s outcome is 𝑔);
𝑔∈{ok, fail}.
Surface syntax n.on_g » m
feedback channels (O, emitted by the target)
O ∋cov(𝑚)
line coverage
| branch(𝑚)
branch coverage
| san(𝜏)
sanitizer report
| trace(𝑛)
agent trace
| outcome(𝑃)
test outcome
(b) Well-formedness
Inference rules
fv(𝜋) ⊆In(𝑛) ∪O
⊢agent(𝜌, 𝜋,𝑚,𝜙) : Node (T-Agent)
⊢𝑛: Node
𝑘∈N+
⊢fanout(𝑛,𝑘) : Node (T-Fanout)
⊢𝑛1 : Node
⊢𝑛2 : Node
𝑛1.out ∈fv(𝜋𝑛2 )
⊢𝑛1 →𝑛2 : Edge
(T-Edge)
⊢𝑛1 : Node
⊢𝑛2 : Node
𝑔∈{ok, fail}
⊢𝑛1 →𝑔𝑛2 : Edge
(T-Branch)
∀𝑛∈N. ∃𝑛0 ∈Src(𝑃). 𝑛0 ⇝E 𝑛
⊢𝑃: Conn
(T-Conn)
(∀𝑛. ⊢𝑛: Node)
(∀𝑒. ⊢𝑒: Edge)
⊢𝑃: Conn
⊢𝑃: Harness
(T-Pipe)
Notation
In(𝑛) = {𝑛′.out | (𝑛′ →𝑛) ∈E} (inputs visible to 𝑛)
𝑛0 ⇝E 𝑛: a directed path 𝑛0 →∗𝑛exists in E
Src(𝑃) = {𝑛∈N |  (𝑛′ →𝑛) ∈E} (source nodes)
𝑛.out : output channel of node 𝑛
fv(𝜋) : free template variables of 𝜋
Figure 2: The AgentFlow language: abstract syntax (a) and well-formedness rules (b). The runtime that executes a well-formed
program is described in Algorithm 1 and Section 6.
a fixed pool. AgentFlow instead ranges over all five components
(A, G, Σ, Φ, Ψ) inside a single typed grammar, so every proposed
edit, whether it adds an agent, rewires the graph, rebinds a channel,
revokes a tool, or changes the retry behaviour, is a local rewrite of
a program in the same language.
4.2
A Typed DSL for Harnesses
We define a typed, graph-structured domain-specific language for
specifying multi-agent harnesses (Figure 2). A program 𝑃= (N, E)
is a labelled directed graph: N is the node set (agents, optionally
lifted into parallel families by fanout), and E the edge set (directed
edges between nodes). The five-component view from Section 4.1
maps directly into this DSL: the agent set A becomes the agent
nodes in N, the topology G becomes E, the per-edge schemas
Σ are encoded by which upstream outputs each agent’s template