AsmRAG: LLM-Driven Malware Detection by
Retrieving Functionally Similar Assembly Code
ElMouatez Billah Karbab1*
1*Joaan Bin Jassim Academy for Defence Studies, Al-Khor, Qatar.
Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): mouatez@karbab.net;
Abstract
Deep learning malware detectors achieve high classiﬁcation accuracy but suﬀer
from severe interpretability limitations, typically returning probabilistic verdicts
that lack forensic context. We introduce AsmRAG, a framework performing mal-
ware analysis through Assembly-Level Retrieval-Augmented Generation. Unlike
classiﬁers built on global statistical features, AsmRAG reformulates detection as an
evidence-based retrieval task. The system uses a code-specialized Large Language
Model (LLM) to analyze assembly functions and convert them into seman-
tic embeddings. This process constructs a searchable knowledge base resilient
to syntactic obfuscation. For inference, we propose a Density-Weighted Anchor
Selection mechanism that isolates the primary unit of malicious logic within a
binary to extract veriﬁable forensic evidence and resist evasion attempts. Testing
on a curated dataset of 40k binaries shows AsmRAG reaching a detection F1-score
of 96% alongside a family attribution F1-score of 95%. Comparisons conﬁrm this
semantic retrieval approach remains robust against metamorphic obfuscation.
When holistic baselines (EMBER and ResNeXt) degrade, our methodology gives
Security Operations Centers a transparent and reliable alternative.
Keywords: Malware Detection, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), Large
Language Models (LLM), Assembly Code Analysis, Assembly Code Embeddings,
Explainable AI (XAI)
1 Introduction
Deep learning provides stronger defenses against automated polymorphism than
static signatures [1, 2], yet it introduces signiﬁcant limitations in interpretability and
1
arXiv:2604.23196v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

robustness. Modern “black box” models (e.g., EMBER [3], ResNeXt [4]) give Secu-
rity Operations Center analysts opaque probabilistic verdicts. These systems also
remain vulnerable to global obfuscation techniques, such as dead-code insertion, which
alter ﬁle-level statistics without changing local semantics. We propose shifting mal-
ware analysis from closed-set classiﬁcation to open-set evidence-based retrieval. This
approach prioritizes identifying functionally equivalent malicious logic rather than
relying on statistical approximation.
We introduce AsmRAG, a framework that applies Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) to low-level assembly code. Unlike feature-based classiﬁers, AsmRAG moves
beyond binary labels to retrieve speciﬁc, veriﬁable code snippets from a knowledge
base of known threats. To bridge the “Semantic Gap” where diﬀerent assembly
instructions execute identical logic, we use a code-specialized Large Language Model
(LLM) to generate semantic embeddings. These embeddings map functionally equiv-
alent functions to close coordinates in a vector space, which keeps the retrieval
process resilient against syntactic obfuscation. This method establishes direct Forensic
Explainability. The system isolates the most representative “Anchor Function” inside
a suspect binary and compares it against a retrieved “proof” sample. Through this
mechanism, AsmRAG delivers clear, interpretable evidence for malware attribution.
This paper makes the following contributions:
1. Assembly RAG Detection Architecture. We design AsmRAG, a framework
that uses a RAG architecture for malware detection at the function level. Shifting
the analysis from global ﬁle statistics to targeted semantic retrieval grounds the
detection process in atomic forensic evidence.
2. Noise-Resilient Embedding Strategy. We present a method to generate
dense vector representations by extracting assembly functions, minimizing canon-
icalization steps, and embedding the results with a pre-trained LLM. We pair
this with a new Semantic Library Filtering mechanism to discard the benign
boilerplate code that typically overwhelms function-level classiﬁers.
3. Density-Weighted Anchor Attribution. We engineer a scoring system to
identify the “Anchor Function” (q∗) using the density of its malicious neigh-
borhood. This isolation drives the generation of targeted natural language
explanations, translating high-dimensional vector similarity into human-readable
insights.
4. Evaluation and Comparison. We test our approach on a curated dataset
of 40,814 binaries spanning 17 malware families. AsmRAG reaches a detec-
tion F1-score of 96.5% alongside an attribution F1-score of 0.95. We show
improved robustness against adversarial compilation compared to industry base-
lines (EMBER [3], ResNeXt [4]). These results conﬁrm the stability of semantic
retrieval against common evasion attempts.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes the threat
model and the semantic gap. Section 3 details the system architecture and describes
the embedding pipeline. Section 4 presents empirical results on detection performance
and robustness. We discuss system limitations in Section 5 and conclude in Section 7.
2

2 Background and Motivation
Learning-based malware detection systems achieve high discriminative accuracy but
often suﬀer from severe deﬁcits in forensic interpretability. In this section, we formal-
ize the adversarial landscape and argue that resilient detection requires a shift from
probabilistic classiﬁcation to semantic retrieval.
2.1 The Adversarial Landscape: Semantic Invariance
We model the defense of binary executables as a game deﬁned over the space of
programs P. The adversary seeks to generate a variant P ′ from a malicious seed Pmal
that evades detection while preserving the original malicious payload.
We deﬁne this formally through Trace Equivalence. Let Σ be the set of observable
architectural states (e.g., memory writes, syscalls). A given program P induces a set
of execution traces Tr(P) ⊆Σ∗. An adversarial transformation function T : P →P
is valid if and only if it preserves observational equivalence:
∀τ ∈Tr(P), ∃τ ′ ∈Tr(T (P)) : τ ≈τ ′
(1)
Here, ≈denotes semantic equivalence, meaning the sequence of eﬀective state changes
remains constant despite syntactic perturbations.
The Syntactic Noise Problem.ă To achieve evasion, adversaries exploit the inher-
ent redundancy of the Instruction Set Architecture (ISA). They inject syntactic noise
by inserting dead code, substituting instructions, and ﬂattening control ﬂow. This
manipulation expands the high-dimensional volume of the malware family, pushing
P ′ away from P in the raw feature space (e.g., byte n-grams or opcode histograms)
without altering the underlying logic graph.
2.1.1 The Boundary Sensitivity Problem
Discriminative models rely on statistical approximations, making them inherently
sensitive to the geometry of their decision boundaries. Obfuscation techniques act
as adversarial perturbations designed to push a sample xP ′ across these boundaries.
Because standard models operate on “surface” features such as token frequency or
byte entropy, the distance in feature space ∆(xP , xP ′) can grow arbitrarily large
despite semantic identity. Consider the example in Listing 1. A sequence-based model
(e.g., LSTM [5]) trained on P will likely assign a low probability to P ′ because of the
added noise (nop) and the register swap (eax →ebx). The model eﬀectively treats
the obfuscated variant as a distinct, unknown entity.
2.2 The Interpretability Gap in Deep Learning
Adopting Deep Learning (DL) models [4, 6] builds necessary resilience against such
obfuscation. This shift, however, introduces a critical operational ﬂaw commonly
known as the “Black Box” problem.
Let fθ : P →[0, 1] be a neural detector parameterized by θ. Within a Security
Operations Center (SOC), a simple prediction like fθ(P ′) > 0.99 is insuﬃcient for
3

; (a) Reference Logic (Seed)
loc_start:
mov
eax, [ebp+var_4]
; Load accumulator
xor
eax, 0x5A
; Payload: Encrypt
mov
[ebp+var_4], eax
; Store
inc
ecx
; Update iterator
cmp
ecx, 100
; Loop condition
jl
short loc_start
; (b) Obfuscated Variant P’
loc_new:
nop
; [Noise] Dead code
mov
ebx, [ebp+var_4]
; [Reg Swap] eax -> ebx
xor
ebx, 90
; [Synonym] 0x5A == 90
mov
[ebp+var_4], ebx
; Store (same slot)
add
ecx, 1
; [Subst] inc -> add
cmp
ecx, 0x64
; [Synonym] 100 -> 0x64
jl
short loc_new
; [Rename] label only
Fig. 1 Semantic Invariance amidst Syntactic Variance. The adversary alters the syntax (registers,
opcodes, literals) and topology (dead code insertion, label renaming) while preserving the data-ﬂow
graph over the live variables.
practical response. Analysts require attribution: they must know exactly why a binary
is malicious rather than just accepting that it is malicious.
2.2.1 Failure of Attribution
Standard discriminative models deﬁne a decision boundary to partition the available
feature space. They compress input data into a latent vector z, eﬀectively destroying
any structural mapping back to the original assembly code. When fθ successfully
detects an obfuscated variant P ′, the system remains unable to localize the speciﬁc
granular functions responsible for that malicious verdict. This structural disconnect
creates a formal Interpretability Gap:
Gap(P ′) = H(Y |P ′) −H(Y |P ′, E)
(2)
Here, H represents entropy, Y denotes the ground truth label, and E indicates the
forensic evidence (such as a reference to a known non-obfuscated function). Current
state-of-the-art models [4, 6] successfully minimize prediction error yet consistently
fail to provide this critical evidence E.
2.3 Retrieval as Forensic Grounding
We address this gap by reframing detection as a Nearest Neighbor Retrieval
problem on a semantic manifold.
4

Fig. 2 The Manifold Hypothesis for Forensics. While obfuscation (red noise) pushes the variant
P ′ far from the source P in Euclidean space, they remain proximal on the Semantic Manifold. AsmRAG
projects inputs to this manifold to retrieve the “Anchor Function” (evidence).
2.3.1 The Manifold Hypothesis
We posit that valid assembly functions reside on a low-dimensional manifold M ⊂Rd
embedded within the high-dimensional space of possible byte sequences. Obfuscation
thus acts as a perturbation vector ϵ that displaces P from the “canonical” manifold.
Traditional classiﬁers attempt to delineate complex boundaries around these noisy
regions. Instead, AsmRAG (see Figure 2) learns a projection Φ that maps both the
pristine malware P and the obfuscated variant P ′ to the same resilient neighborhood
on M:
||Φ(P) −Φ(P ′)||2 < δ ≪||Φ(P) −Φ(Benign)||2
(3)
2.3.2 Anchor Function Attribution
By utilizing a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture, we do not merely
classify P ′; we retrieve P. This process identiﬁes the “Anchor Function”, the speciﬁc
code segment in the retrieved binary that shares the highest semantic similarity with
the suspicious input.
This mechanism bridges the Interpretability Gap. Instead of an opaque probability
score, the system provides a diﬀerential explanation: “This binary is malicious because
Function A contains logic semantically isomorphic to the encryption routine in Family
X, despite the insertion of superﬂuous instructions.” This shifts the paradigm from
probabilistic inference to evidence-based retrieval.
2.3.3 From Cognitive Abstraction to Vector Projection
Conventional automated detection enables rapid processing but suﬀers from severe
deﬁcits in robustness compared to human analysis. This divergence stems from the
level of abstraction applied. A human reverse engineer analyzing Snippet (b) performs
cognitive abstraction through the following steps:
5

Stage 1: Knowledge Base Construction
Raw Dataset
(Malware
+ Benign)
Disassembler
(IDA/Ghidra)
Library Filter
(Blocklist L)
Minimal
Canonicalization
Qwen3-Embedding
(Zero-Shot Emb)
FAISS Index
(DKB)
Stage 2: Evidence-Based Analysis
Unknown Sample
S
Disassembler
Library Filter
Minimal
Canonicalization
Qwen3-Embedding
(Inference)
Top-K Retrieval
(Cosine Sim)
Distance-Weighted
Voting (αi)
Ω(S) > τfile?
Malicious
& Family C
Benign
vf
QS
ANN Search
Nk
Yes
No
Fig. 3 The AsmRAG System Architecture. The pipeline minimizes preprocessing, relying on the
Qwen3-Embedding model to embed raw assembly semantics. The online phase retrieves evidence
from the FAISS knowledge base to perform weighted detection.
1. Noise Filtering: The analyst mentally discards the nop instruction as function-
ally irrelevant.
2. Normalization: They recognize that inc ecx and add edx, 1 represent seman-
tically isomorphic operations for incrementing a loop counter.
3. Data Flow Tracking: They track the data ﬂow into register ebx, identifying it
as a temporary storage container equivalent to eax in Snippet (a), independent
of the register’s nomenclature.
Through this process, the analyst concludes that the semantics (the functional
intent of XORing a buﬀer in a loop) remain invariant, identifying the code as a
variant of the known malware family. This manual cognitive process, however, is slow,
resource-intensive, and unscalable against the sheer volume of modern threats.
AsmRAG operationalizes this expert intuition at scale. The system extracts and ana-
lyzes assembly with a Large Language Model pre-trained on vast code repositories,
allowing it to learn an automated abstraction function. The model projects both the
concise reference (a) and the noisy variant (b) to proximal points in a high-dimensional
vector space (va ≈vb). This geometry enables the system to resist syntactic obfus-
cation in a manner analogous to human cognition. It retrieves the original malicious
code as veriﬁable forensic evidence without incurring the prohibitive costs of manual
inspection or heavy-weight symbolic execution.
3 AsmRAG System Design
Current detection models achieve high accuracy but suﬀer from severe limitations in
human interpretability. We introduce AsmRAG, a resilient paradigm designed to bridge
this gap. We structure this granular system by constructing the Knowledge Base,
performing Evidence-Based Analysis, and executing Generative Reporting.
3.1 Stage 1: Knowledge Base Construction
The foundation of our system is a searchable index of semantic assembly embeddings,
curated to maximize signal integrity and minimize noise.
6

Flagged Sample S
Functions:
q∗
Anchor
Targeted Retrieval
(Family Cbest Subspace)
Query q∗
Evidence vproof
LLM Generator
(Explain Functional Logic)
Explanation E
Analyst
/ Auto
Update KB
(DKB ∪q∗)
Conﬁrm
Active Learning
Fig. 4 The Active Explanation Loop. AsmRAG selects the single most critical “Anchor Function” q∗,
generates a speciﬁc explanation against proof vproof , and ingests conﬁrmed detections back into the
database to enhance future resilience.
3.1.1 Corpus Curation and Semantic Library Filtering
We compile a dataset D
=
Dmal ∪Dben
sourced from public repositories
(VirusShare [7], SOREL-20M [8], EMBER [3]) and a baseline of benign PE ﬁles
collected from clean Windows installations.
Cryptographic hashing (e.g., MD5) provides rapid ﬁltering of statically linked
library functions, yet it introduces brittle vulnerability to minor compiler changes.
A slight shift in compiler version or optimization ﬂags alters the binary signature,
allowing common library code to contaminate the dataset. This contamination causes
high False Positive rates; a detector might incorrectly ﬂag a benign executable simply
because it shares a speciﬁc compiled version of printf with a known malware family.
We replace brittle hashing with a Semantic Library Filtering mechanism that
operates directly in the embedding space. Before detailing this mechanism, we brieﬂy
preview the embedding function used throughout the pipeline; its full technical
description follows in Section 3.1.2. We treat the projection Φ : f 7→vf ∈Rd pro-
duced by the Qwen3-Embedding model as a shared semantic primitive. The same
projection supports both library identiﬁcation and malicious logic retrieval. Reusing Φ
across both tasks simpliﬁes deployment and guarantees that ﬁltering decisions remain
consistent with downstream retrieval geometry.
Shared-Representation Dependency. Employing a single embedding function for
both ﬁltering and detection introduces a known dependency: weaknesses in Φ propa-
gate to both stages. If the encoder fails to distinguish a malicious routine from a library
function (e.g., a custom cryptographic primitive semantically close to openssl’s AES
implementation), that routine risks erroneous ﬁltering before reaching the malicious
retrieval stage. We mitigate this risk through three design choices. First, we cali-
brate τlib conservatively (see Threshold Calibration below) to favor recall of malicious
logic over aggressive noise reduction. Second, we restrict Vlib to functions compiled
from veriﬁed open-source library distributions, preventing contamination from look-
alike user code. Third, the downstream Density-Weighted Voting mechanism requires
7

Algorithm 1: AsmRAG Inference and Anchor Selection
Input: Unknown Binary S, Knowledge Base DKB, Blocklist L
Input: Thresholds τfunc, τfile
Output: Verdict, Family Cbest, Explanation E
// Stage 1: Preprocessing & Embedding
1 Fraw ←Disassemble(S)
2 QS ←∅
3 foreach f ∈Fraw do
4
if hash(f) /∈L then
5
f ′ ←Canonicalize(f)
6
q ←QwenEmbed(f ′)
7
QS.append(q)
8
end
9 end
// Stage 2: Function Analysis & Scoring
10 Mflagged ←∅
// Set of malicious functions
11 Scorefamily ←Map<Family, Float>(0.0)
12 foreach qi ∈QS do
13
Nk ←FAISS.Search(DKB, qi, k)
// Eq. 4: Distance-Weighted Voting
14
αi ←CalcMaliciousScore(Nk)
15
if αi > τfunc then
16
Mflagged.add(qi)
// Accumulate evidence for attribution
17
foreach vj ∈Nk do
18
if vj.label ̸= Benign then
19
Scorefamily[vj.label] += sim(qi, vj)
20
end
21
end
22
end
23 end
// Stage 3: Sample Verdict & Explanation
24 Ω(S) ←|Mflagged|/|QS|
// Eq. 5
25 if Ω(S) ≤τfile then
26
return Benign, N/A, N/A
27 end
28 Cbest ←argmax(Scorefamily)
// Anchor Selection: Best evidence for Cbest
29 q∗←null,
max_sim ←0
30 foreach q ∈Mflagged do
31
vnear ←GetNearestInFamily(q, DKB, Cbest)
32
if sim(q, vnear) > max_sim then
33
q∗←q,
vproof ←vnear
34
max_sim ←sim(q, vnear)
35
end
36 end
// Generative Explanation
37 E ←LLMgen(Prompt(q∗, vproof ))
38 return Malicious, Cbest, E
agreement across a neighborhood of retrieved functions, meaning a single misclassiﬁed
ﬁlter decision does not catastrophically aﬀect the sample-level verdict. We quantify
the residual impact of this dependency in the ablation results of Section 4.2.
The ﬁltering mechanism proceeds in two oﬄine phases:
Phase A: Constructing the Reference Library Index. We aggregate and
compile source code for standard statically linked libraries (e.g., glibc, openssl,
zlib, boost) across multiple architectures (x86, x64) and optimization levels (-O0 to
-O3). Processing these binaries through Φ generates a reference set of library vectors
Vlib, which we index in a dedicated FAISS structure, Ilib.
8

Phase B: Semantic Tagging and Filtering. During the ingestion of the main
malware and benign corpus, the system ﬁrst embeds each extracted function f into
a vector vf = Φ(f). We then query Ilib to identify the nearest library neighbor. We
deﬁne a ﬁltering indicator function ϕ(f) as follows:
ϕ(f) =
{
1
if maxvl∈Vlib sim(vf, vl) > τlib
0
otherwise
(4)
The ﬁnal ﬁltered set of functions for a sample S is thus deﬁned as:
Ffiltered = {f ∈S | ϕ(f) = 0}
(5)
Threshold Calibration. The threshold τlib directly governs the trade-oﬀbetween
noise reduction (ﬁltering benign boilerplate) and evidence preservation (retaining
malicious logic that incidentally resembles library code). To calibrate this parameter
empirically, we constructed a held-out library calibration set containing 2,500 manually
veriﬁed library functions (positives) and 2,500 malicious functions (negatives) drawn
from families with documented cryptographic or networking payloads (where library-
like functionality is most likely to trigger false ﬁltering). We performed a grid search
over τlib ∈{0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.92, 0.95, 0.97, 0.99}, measuring ﬁlter precision (fraction
of ﬁltered functions that are genuinely library code) and malicious recall (fraction of
malicious functions preserved after ﬁltering).
Table 1 Sensitivity of Semantic Library Filtering to τlib.
τlib
Filter Prec.
Malicious Recall
KB Size Reduction
Downstream F1
0.80
0.887
0.912
41.2%
0.923
0.85
0.931
0.948
35.7%
0.941
0.90
0.968
0.974
29.4%
0.954
0.92
0.981
0.986
26.8%
0.958
0.95
0.993
0.995
22.1%
0.960
0.97
0.997
0.998
17.3%
0.955
0.99
0.999
0.999
9.6%
0.942
As shown in Table 1, performance is stable in the neighborhood of τlib = 0.95,
with downstream F1 varying by less than 0.6% across τlib ∈[0.90, 0.97]. Lower thresh-
olds (e.g., 0.80) aggressively prune boilerplate but erroneously discard nearly 9% of
malicious logic, degrading downstream attribution. Higher thresholds (e.g., 0.99) pre-
serve almost all malicious functions but retain excessive library noise, which dilutes
the density-weighted signal during Stage 2 retrieval. We select τlib = 0.95 because it
maximizes downstream F1 while maintaining a malicious recall above 99.5%, keep-
ing the ﬁlter decision well-bounded in the regime where the encoder projects genuine
library code with high intra-class similarity.
By matching semantic similarity rather than exact bytes, this mechanism success-
fully ﬁlters library functions even when they exhibit minor syntactic variations from
9

recompilation or base address relocation. This ﬁltering ensures that the AsmRAG knowl-
edge base isolates user-deﬁned logic and potential malicious payloads, signiﬁcantly
improving the system’s signal-to-noise ratio.
3.1.2 Instruction-Preserving Canonicalization and Semantic
Encoding
Aggressive normalization shrinks the vocabulary size to accommodate BERT-based
encoders (e.g., [9, 10]), but it introduces critical limitations for binary analysis. By
abstracting operands into generic tokens (e.g., replacing rax with REG and 0x10 with
VAL), these approaches discard the subtle artifacts of register allocation and compiler
optimization required for precise authorship attribution.
We implement a Minimal Canonicalization strategy to preserve these details.
We strictly limit preprocessing to the abstraction of absolute memory addresses
(remapping 0x0040123A to MEM_PTR), since these are randomized artifacts of the
linker’s base address (ASLR) and contain no underlying logical signal. Crucially, we
preserve the following elements:
• Raw Immediate Values: These are essential for identifying speciﬁc crypto-
graphic constants and distinct loop bounds.
• Register Names: Preserving explicit register usage patterns (e.g., rbp vs.
rsp indexing) helps capture the compiler’s intended calling convention and
optimization strategy.
We select the Qwen3-Embedding architecture [11] as our backbone because it han-
dles low-level semantics better than constrained domain-speciﬁc models. We resolve
the vocabulary collapse and out-of-vocabulary fragmentation common in BERT-based
baselines [12] by utilizing a standard BPE tokenizer. At the same time, we exploit
the model’s pre-training on systems languages to derive a transitive semantic under-
standing of assembly logic. Its extended attention mechanism eliminates the need
for sliding-window truncation on large functions [9], allowing us to capture holistic
control-ﬂow dependencies and functional intent within an oﬀ-the-shelf framework.
Formally, we establish this mapping by passing the minimally modiﬁed function
instructions If through the model M. We isolate the ﬁnal hidden state of the sequence
to yield a dense vector representation vf ∈Rd. These resulting vectors are then
indexed in a FAISS [13] structure optimized for high-dimensional cosine similarity
search.
3.2 Stage 2: Evidence-Based Analysis
Given an unknown sample S, the system ﬁrst generates a set of query embeddings
QS = {q1, . . . , qm} using the pipeline described in Section 3.1.2, deliberately exclud-
ing standard library functions. The analysis then proceeds hierarchically. We evaluate,
aggregate, and classify the semantic intent of these individual functions to derive a
comprehensive verdict for the entire binary.
10

3.2.1 Retrieval and Similarity Scoring
Our detection methodology relies on the premise that malicious functionality resides
on a low-dimensional manifold within the embedding space, even when heavily obfus-
cated. For each query function qi, we execute an Approximate Nearest Neighbor
(ANN) search to retrieve the set Nk(qi) comprising the k most similar functions from
the Knowledge Base.
We select Cosine Similarity as the primary distance metric. Unlike Euclidean
distance, Cosine Similarity evaluates the semantic alignment, or orientation, of the
vectors rather than their absolute magnitude [14]. This property renders the metric
robust against variations in function length or alignment padding introduced during
compilation.
sim(qi, vj) =
qi · vj
∥qi∥∥vj∥
(6)
Here, vj represents a retrieved neighbor from the Knowledge Base.
Retrieval Objective (Recall@k):ă While Cosine Similarity provides a precise
ranking, evaluating these results in isolation remains insuﬃcient. We measure the
operational success of the retrieval phase using Recall@k. Because AsmRAG depends
on identifying an “Anchor Function” to generate its explanations, the model does
not require a completely homogenous neighborhood. It only dictates that at least one
high-ﬁdelity semantic match from the correct malware family appears within the top
results. Formally, for a query function qi belonging to a ground-truth family C, we
deﬁne:
Recall@k(qi) = 1 (∃v ∈Nk(qi) : label(v) = C)
(7)
This speciﬁc metric guides the broader system design. We optimize the embedding
space to maximize Recall@20, a constraint that ensures the subsequent generative
stage always possesses access to valid, veriﬁable provenance evidence.
3.2.2 Function-Level Detection and Anchor Identiﬁcation
Unweighted majority voting among neighbors oﬀers computational simplicity, yet
it risks insuﬃcient accuracy. An unweighted approach treats a neighbor showing a
0.99 similarity, essentially an exact match, exactly the same as one exhibiting a
0.60 similarity, a mere loose resemblance. We address this ﬂaw by implementing a
Distance-Weighted Voting scheme that assigns proportionally higher inﬂuence to
semantically closer evidence.
The maliciousness score αi ∈[0, 1] for a given function qi is thus calculated as the
weighted proportion of known malicious neighbors within the retrieved set:
αi =
∑
vj∈Nk 1(yj ∈Mal) · sim(qi, vj)
∑
vj∈Nk sim(qi, vj)
(8)
Here, 1(·) represents the indicator function, returning 1 if the retrieved neighbor
vj belongs to Dmal. This score eﬀectively quantiﬁes the local density of malicious code
directly surrounding the query function within the vector space.
The system ﬂags the function as malicious if αi > τfunc. Threshold Optimiza-
tion: The threshold τfunc serves not as an arbitrary hyperparameter, but as an
11

empirically derived constant. We test, analyze, and optimize this value using a ded-
icated held-out validation set. A grid search maximizes the F1-score subject to one
strict constraint: the False Positive Rate (FPR) on benign functions must remain
strictly below 1%. This conservative approach guarantees that AsmRAG only ﬂags func-
tions supported by strong semantic evidence, drastically reducing false alarms in
legitimate software.
3.3 Stage 3: Detection and Active Explanation Loop
The ﬁnal stage translates function-level signals into a deﬁnitive binary verdict and
utilizes the RAG architecture to explain that decision. A primary contribution of our
methodology involves the eﬃcient allocation of computational generative resources
through the “Anchor Function” concept.
3.3.1 Formalized Sample-Level Scoring
Standard binary compilation integrates wrapper functions, statically linked utilities,
and boilerplate setup routines. Simply averaging the raw scores of all included func-
tions would artiﬁcially dilute the genuine malicious signal. To prevent this, we deﬁne
the sample-level maliciousness score Ω(S) speciﬁcally as the density of high-conﬁdence
malicious logic:
Ω(S) =
∑m
i=1 1(αi > τfunc)
|QS|
(9)
The sample S is classiﬁed as malicious if Ω(S) > τfile, where τfile is similarly tuned
on the validation set. This speciﬁc metric actively resists “code dilution” attacks,
scenarios where an adversary intentionally pads a small malicious payload with
overwhelming amounts of benign code to artiﬁcially lower an average anomaly score.
Family Attribution: When the sample is detected as malicious, we attribute
it to a speciﬁc family. We calculate a Weighted Family Score for every family C
present within the retrieved neighborhoods of all ﬂagged functions. The sample is then
attributed to the family Cbest that accumulates the highest total similarity mass.
3.3.2 Discriminative Anchor Selection and Explanation
While manual analysis yields thorough results, demanding analysts inspect every func-
tion in a suspect binary creates a cognitively intractable burden. To facilitate rapid
triage, AsmRAG identiﬁes and explains only the single most representative Anchor
Function q∗.
A trivial selection strategy might simply pick the function exhibiting the highest
raw similarity score. This naive approach, however, risks selecting common utility
functions (such as string wrappers) that happen to perfectly match a training sample,
ignoring the actual malicious payload entirely. We prevent this error by implementing
two distinct mechanisms:
1. Pre-ﬁltering: As detailed in Section 3.1.1, all standard library code is removed
prior to the core analysis.
12

2. Cluster Density Scoring: We deﬁne representativeness not by proximity to a
single nearest neighbor, but by the speciﬁc density of the function’s surrounding
malicious neighborhood.
Formally, the system selects q∗from the set of ﬂagged functions Mflagged by
maximizing the accumulated similarity mass speciﬁcally within the attributed family
Cbest:
q∗=
argmax
q∈Mflagged


∑
v∈Nk(q)
1(label(v) = Cbest) · sim(q, v)


(10)
This summation ensures that the chosen Anchor Function is not merely similar
to one isolated vector. Instead, it must be centrally located within the target family’s
semantic manifold. This mathematical constraint guarantees the function represents
a recurring, deﬁning behavior of that speciﬁc malware family.
Once q∗is identiﬁed, we retrieve its closest valid neighbor vproof to serve as
the baseline forensic reference. The Generative LLM is then invoked to perform a
diﬀerential analysis:
E = LLMgen(P(q∗, vproof))
(11)
The system prompt P instructs the LLM to ignore superﬁcial syntactic diﬀerences,
such as minor register reallocations, and focus exclusively on the underlying functional
logic. The resulting explanation E directly answers the analyst’s core question: “Why is
this function considered a variant of Family X?” An output might state, for example,
“Both functions implement the domain generation algorithm characteristic of Dridex,
utilizing identical polynomial constants despite altered control ﬂow structures.”
3.3.3 Continuous Database Update (Active Learning)
This focused explanation mechanism naturally supports a Human-in-the-Loop Active
Learning workﬂow.
1. The analyst reviews the generated Anchor Function explanation E.
2. If the human analyst conﬁrms the detection, the system promotes the embedding
q∗directly from the query set into the Knowledge Base, tagging it with the
veriﬁed family label.
3. This action creates a permanent new reference point in the vector space,
densifying the manifold around newly discovered variants.
Standard deep learning classiﬁers require expensive, computationally heavy
retraining cycles to assimilate new data. AsmRAG, in contrast, adapts dynamically.
Updating the database immediately improves detection accuracy for any future sam-
ples similar to the newly conﬁrmed variant, ensuring the system evolves continuously
alongside the active threat landscape.
13

4 Evaluation
We formulated speciﬁc research questions to validate the overall eﬃcacy of AsmRAG. We
assess its baseline detection performance (RQ1), its resilience against syntactic obfus-
cation (RQ2), and the isolated contribution of its individual architectural components
including explanation quality (RQ3).
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Environment
We conducted our experiments on a workstation equipped with dual NVIDIA Quadro
RTX 8000 GPUs (48GB VRAM each), an Intel Xeon Gold 5218 CPU (32 cores @
2.30GHz), and 512GB of RAM. We utilized Ghidra [15] for headless disassembly,
FAISS [13] for high-performance vector indexing, and Ollama [16] for local model
inference.
4.1.2 Models and Embedding
We select Qwen3-Embedding1 (8B parameters, 4096-dimensional output, 32K context
window) as our semantic encoder because it delivers reliable performance on spe-
cialized code-related tasks within a local deployment environment. We execute the
necessary LLM reasoning tasks using the GPT-OSS:20B2 model, hosted locally via
the Ollama3 framework.
4.1.3 Datasets and Corpus Curation
To guarantee experimental integrity and prevent temporal data leakage, we curated a
large-scale corpus containing 40,814 binaries (19.2 GB). We partitioned this corpus
using a strict chronological split, simulating a realistic deployment scenario against
future malware variants. Including packed executables artiﬁcially inﬂates dataset sizes,
but risks biasing classiﬁers toward packer stub signatures rather than the actual mali-
cious payload. To avoid this, we enforced a rigorous data sanitation protocol. This step
ensures our static analysis operates strictly on the authentic, unpacked instruction
stream rather than an external obfuscation layer.
The Wild-Augmented Benchmark (Dwild): We built a hybrid dataset by
combining pre-extracted, unpacked samples from the standard SOREL-20M [8] cor-
pus with a targeted “Long-Tail” augmentation of recent threats (collected between
January 2021 and December 2024) sourced from VirusShare [7].
Controlled Obfuscation Subset (Dsrc): Collecting malware directly from the
wild supports robust testing, but introduces potential environmental confounding
due to a lack of precise compilation ground truth. We addressed this limitation by
augmenting our evaluation with a controlled subset Dsrc, derived directly from the
MalwareSourceCode repository [17]. We passed the source code of established fam-
ilies (e.g., Comet, Zeus) through a Multi-Optimization Compilation Pipeline,
1https://ollama.com/library/qwen3-embedding:8b
2https://ollama.com/library/gpt-oss:20b
3https://ollama.com/
14

applying settings from baseline compilation (-O0) up to aggressive instruction reorder-
ing (-O2, -O3) and strict size-optimization (-Os). This generated a parallel corpus
of binaries that are functionally identical yet syntactically divergent, allowing us to
accurately isolate AsmRAG’s semantic stability against adversarial recompilation.
Benign Sources: We acquired and ﬁltered benign samples from clean Windows
10 and Windows 11 installations, alongside veriﬁed software repositories (e.g., Source-
Forge, GitHub releases). This collection strategy ensures a diverse, representative
background of compiler provenance.
Dataset Partitioning and Chronological Split: To enforce temporal separa-
tion and prevent look-ahead bias, we partitioned the corpus into three non-overlapping
subsets based entirely on their ﬁrst-seen timestamps in VirusTotal and SOREL-20M
metadata. Speciﬁcally, we partitioned by ﬁrst-seen date as follows: Knowledge Base
(DKB, 70%) contains samples ﬁrst observed before 2022-06-01; the Validation Set
(10%) contains samples ﬁrst observed between 2022-06-01 and 2023-05-31; and
the held-out Test Set (DT est, 20%) contains samples ﬁrst observed on or after 2023-
06-01. The 2021–2024 VirusShare long-tail augmentation is distributed across all
three splits according to the same ﬁrst-seen date criterion, ensuring that no post-2023-
06-01 sample appears in the KB or validation set. We kept the controlled Dsrc subset
separate, reserving it exclusively for the resilience analysis detailed in Section 4.3
under a leave-one-optimization-out protocol described there.
The ﬁnal corpus comprises 24,120 Benign (Dben) samples (8.2 GB) and 16,694
Malware (Dmal) samples (11 GB), spanning 17 distinct malware families. As detailed
in Table 2, this overall distribution reﬂects the natural real-world imbalance driven
by dominant, high-volume strains like Virlock and Neshta.
Table 2 Detailed Distribution of Malware
Families in Dataset (Dmal).
Family
Count
Family
Count
Virlock
1,671
Comet
1,035
Neshta
1,431
VJadtre
953
Ramnit
1,345
Doboc
890
Floxif
1,293
Sality
713
Gosys
1,280
Virtob
633
Hematite
1,181
Muce
459
Triusor
1,146
Parite
454
Expiro
1,102
FpuJunk
57
Grenam
1,061
4.1.4 Baseline Tools and Training Protocol
We benchmark AsmRAG against two distinct paradigms. To ensure a fair comparison,
both baselines were retrained from scratch on the same DKB distribution used to
populate AsmRAG’s vector index, with hyperparameters tuned on the same validation
set.
15

1. EMBER [3]: The industry-standard baseline for feature-based detection. We
used the public ember feature extractor (v2, 2381-dimensional feature vector com-
bining byte histograms, byte-entropy histograms, string features, and parsed PE
header ﬁelds) and trained a LightGBM classiﬁer with hyperparameters match-
ing those reported by the original authors: num_leaves=2048, max_depth=15,
learning_rate=0.05,
n_estimators=1000,
min_data_in_leaf=1000,
early
stopping with patience 100 on validation AUC. We did not use the published
pre-trained model because it was trained on a diﬀerent (pre-2018) distribution;
using it would confound distribution shift with the cross-compilation eﬀect we
seek to isolate.
2. ResNeXt+ [4]: Represents vision-based detection methods. Because no pub-
lic implementation was available at the time of evaluation, we implemented
the architecture from the original paper’s speciﬁcation. We document our
re-implementation explicitly:
• Preprocessing. Each PE ﬁle is converted to a grayscale image by reading raw
bytes sequentially as unsigned 8-bit pixels. The resulting 1D byte stream
is reshaped into a 2D matrix with width ﬁxed at 256 pixels and height
proportional to ﬁle size. Following the original paper, we resize this matrix
to a ﬁxed 224 × 224 RGB image via bilinear interpolation and replicate the
single channel across R, G, and B to match the ResNeXt input speciﬁcation.
• Backbone. ResNeXt-50 with cardinality 32 and bottleneck width 4 (32x4d),
initialized from ImageNet pre-trained weights.
• Attention module. A CBAM (Convolutional Block Attention Module) block
inserted after each of the four ResNeXt stages, matching the “+” designation
in [4]. Reduction ratio r=16, 7×7 spatial attention kernel.
• Training. Adam optimizer, learning rate 10−4 with cosine annealing, batch
size 64, 50 epochs, cross-entropy loss with class reweighting to handle the
beni

[…middle truncated for length…]

allucinated claims clustered disproportionately around behavioral attributions
(e.g., naming speciﬁc C2 protocols not actually observable in the assembly), whereas
low-level mechanical claims (register usage, arithmetic constants, loop structure) were
almost never hallucinated. This failure mode aligns with known limitations of genera-
tive models invoked on abstract semantic categories, and is a property we conﬁrmed is
23

Table 9 Faithfulness decomposition of 2,148 atomic claims across 500 explanations in Dexpl
(majority vote of three independent Claude Opus 4.5 runs; Fleiss’ κ = 0.82; validated against a
200-claim human-expert subsample at Cohen’s κ = 0.81).
Claim Type
Count
Supp.
Partial
Unsupp.
Mechanical (registers, constants, loops)
1,084
0.971
0.024
0.005
Structural (CFG shape, API usage pattern)
617
0.908
0.072
0.020
Behavioral (attack role, C2 semantics)
447
0.816
0.111
0.073
Aggregate
2,148
0.911
0.063
0.026
shared between the AsmRAG generator and the Claude Opus 4.5 judge: the judge’s error
modes on the 200-claim validation subsample were symmetric, rejecting behavioral
over-speciﬁcity at the same rate the generator produces it.
4.4.2 Hallucination Audit Against Ground Truth
To independently verify the low hallucination rate reported above, we conducted
a secondary audit on the controlled subset Dsrc (Section 4.1.3), for which we pos-
sess the source code of every binary. For each of 120 generated explanations, we
programmatically checked whether every claim referencing a named algorithm (e.g.,
“ROR-13”, “RC4”, “XOR key”, “PEB traversal”) or a speciﬁc constant appeared in
the corresponding source ﬁle. This yielded a ground-truth-veriﬁable hallucination rate
of 2.1% (11 fabricated references out of 527 auditable claims), closely matching the
analyst-annotated rate of 2.6% in Dexpl. Fabrications were predominantly over-speciﬁc
algorithm names where the assembly implemented a generic equivalent (e.g., labeling
a custom rolling hash as “CRC-32”). We discuss mitigations, including constraining
the generator with structured retrieval prompts, in Section 5.
4.4.3 Comparison Against Explanation Baselines
We compared AsmRAG’s anchor-based diﬀerential explanations against three alterna-
tive strategies applied to the same 500 ﬂagged samples from Dexpl:
• SHAP on EMBER features [19]: feature-importance explanations on the
EMBER classiﬁer, rendered as the top-10 contributing features per prediction.
• Grad-CAM on ResNeXt+ [20]: saliency heatmaps over the binary-as-image
representation.
• Nearest-Neighbor only: raw vproof returned without generative diﬀerential
analysis (a lesioned version of AsmRAG).
Because each method produces explanations of a diﬀerent form (feature weights,
pixel saliency, raw assembly, and natural language), we compare them using three
automated proxy metrics chosen to be form-agnostic:
• Localization Rate (L): The fraction of explanations that resolve to a speciﬁc,
addressable code region in the original binary (as opposed to global features or
24

aggregated statistics). This measures whether the explanation points an analyst
to a concrete location for veriﬁcation.
• Semantic Speciﬁcity (S): The fraction of explanations that reference malware-
family-speciﬁc artifacts (family-characteristic constants, API sequences, or algo-
rithmic patterns conﬁrmed via Dsrc source code) rather than generic behavioral
descriptors. Higher values indicate more discriminative forensic content.
• Invariance to Obfuscation (I): The consistency of the explanation across
matched source-level-equivalent binaries in Dsrc compiled under diﬀerent opti-
mization ﬂags. We measured this by computing the Jaccard overlap of extracted
artifacts (constants, API names, opcodes) between explanations of the same
source program under -O0 and -O3. Higher values indicate that the explanation
captures semantic rather than syntactic properties.
Table 10 reports the resulting scores. AsmRAG outperforms both post-hoc attribu-
tion baselines across all three metrics. SHAP explanations over EMBER features point
to global statistics (e.g., “byte histogram bin 127”, “section entropy”), yielding a local-
ization rate near zero. Grad-CAM produces coarse heatmaps over byte-image pixels
that do not map cleanly onto disassembled functions. The Nearest-Neighbor variant
retrieves the correct forensic exemplar and is therefore well-localized, but it cannot
bridge syntactic diﬀerences between an obfuscated query and its clean proof, result-
ing in reduced speciﬁcity on heavily metamorphic samples. The full AsmRAG pipeline
preserves localization, elevates speciﬁcity through the generative diﬀerential analysis,
and maintains high invariance across compilation variants.
Table 10 Comparison of explanation methods on 500 ﬂagged samples using form-agnostic
proxy metrics.
Method
Localization L
Speciﬁcity S
Invariance I
SHAP on EMBER [19]
0.04
0.11
0.29
Grad-CAM on ResNeXt+ [20]
0.18
0.09
0.24
Nearest-Neighbor only (lesioned)
0.95
0.58
0.61
AsmRAG (full)
0.97
0.87
0.84
The gap between the Nearest-Neighbor variant and the full pipeline is particularly
informative: retrieval alone supplies a correct exemplar but does not articulate why the
query and the exemplar are semantically equivalent under obfuscation. The generative
step provides that articulation, and the invariance metric conﬁrms that the resulting
explanation abstracts away compiler- and obfuscation-speciﬁc syntax.
4.4.4 End-to-End Illustration: A Metamorphic Ramnit Sample
To complement the quantitative results above, we trace the complete analysis pipeline
on a speciﬁc Ramnit sample Sram drawn from DT est. This sample features heavy meta-
morphic obfuscation employing both register reassignment and dead-code injection,
and the baseline EMBER model misclassiﬁed it as benign (malicious-class conﬁdence
25

0.42) due to entropy deviations from its training distribution. AsmRAG, by contrast,
ﬂagged Sram with Ω(Sram) = 0.98, surpassing τfile, and attributed it to Ramnit as
Cbest.
Anchor selection. The Density-Weighted Anchor Selection mechanism (Eq. 10)
converged on a complex, heavily obfuscated routine q∗. By maximizing accumulated
similarity mass across the neighborhood rather than trusting a single nearest neighbor,
the mechanism correctly rejected candidate decoys (heap wrappers, string utilities)
that would have misled a naive retriever. The selected q∗was densely embedded
within the Ramnit cluster, providing a high-ﬁdelity semantic pivot.
Generative explanation. The nearest proof neighbor vproof was a clean,
non-obfuscated API resolution routine from a 2021 Ramnit variant. The generator
produced:
System Output [Explanation E]:
“Functional Identity Conﬁrmed: The anchor function q∗is semantically equivalent
to the Dynamic API Resolution routine consistent with variants of the Ramnit family
(vproof).”
“Shared Logic: Both functions orchestrate a loop that traverses the Process Environ-
ment Block (PEB) to locate kernel32.dll in memory. They parse the Export Address
Table and calculate a hash of each function name using the standard ROR-13 (Rotate Right
13) algorithm to resolve speciﬁc API addresses at runtime.”
Every atomic claim in this explanation (PEB traversal, EAT parsing, ROR-13
hashing) was veriﬁed against the assembly of q∗, placing this sample in the Supported
category of our faithfulness audit.
Active learning. Following analyst conﬁrmation, AsmRAG promotes the obfus-
cated anchor q∗into DKB, densifying the malicious manifold around this speciﬁc
evasion pattern. This inoculates the system against similar future metamorphic
variants without the prohibitive cost of model retraining.
5 Discussion and Limitations
The empirical ﬁndings presented in Section 4 validate AsmRAG not merely as a detection
utility, but as a proof-of-concept for a paradigm shift in malware binary analysis.
We interpret these ﬁndings to explain exactly why semantic retrieval outperforms
traditional classiﬁcation. We discuss the broader operational implications of this shift
and rigorously deﬁne the practical boundaries of our approach.
5.1 Why It Works: Granularity and Density
The most signiﬁcant ﬁnding from our evaluation concerns the stability of AsmRAG
against obfuscation (RQ2). This divergence from baselines such as EMBER and
ResNeXt+ stems directly from two core architectural decisions:
26

Local Semantics vs. Global Statistics
Holistic baselines rely on global statistical awareness, leaving them vulnerable to
brittle distortion from obfuscation techniques like dead-code insertion. AsmRAG vali-
dates the “Atomic Evidence” hypothesis by strictly enforcing local semantic analysis.
The system calculates the Ω(S) metric to isolate speciﬁc malicious routines entirely
independent of the ﬁle’s overall entropy. Our framework detects threats even within
“Trojanized” binaries dominated by 90% benign code. It successfully identiﬁes the
core unit of malicious intent (such as a speciﬁc Ramnit routine) in scenarios where
global proﬁling fails.
The Role of Density-Weighted Voting
Raw retrieval enables initial matching but remains insuﬃcient due to the “Library
Problem” (the overwhelming prevalence of common utility functions). We imple-
mented Density-Weighted Voting (Algorithm 1) to function as a semantic ﬁlter.
Mandating that a query function reside within a dense cluster of malicious neighbors,
rather than relying on an isolated nearest neighbor, successfully suppresses statisti-
cal outliers. This architectural choice explains why our False Positive Rate remained
extremely low (1.2%) even when the system analyzed complex binaries containing
signiﬁcant benign boilerplate.
5.2 Operational Impact: The Active Defense Cycle
Standard alert generation improves SOC awareness yet frequently causes severe “Alert
Fatigue.” Beyond its core detection metrics, AsmRAG mitigates this issue by using
the Anchor Function to present isolated malicious logic directly to the user. This
transforms the analyst’s role from manual investigation to rapid veriﬁcation. The
architecture enables Zero-Shot Adaptation without the computational overhead of
retraining. Indexing conﬁrmed variants instantly converts the neural risk of “catas-
trophic forgetting” into a “cumulative knowledge” advantage. This continuous update
mechanism proves essential for countering dynamic, evolving threat campaigns.
5.3 System Boundaries and Limitations
AsmRAG provides signiﬁcant advantages but retains inherent systemic limitations. We
explicitly outline three critical boundaries regarding its deployment:
Dependence on Knowledge Base Coverage (The Cold Start Problem)
As a retrieval-augmented system, its eﬃcacy strictly depends on the comprehensive-
ness of its underlying index. AsmRAG operates on the premise of semantic overlap. It
struggles to detect entirely novel paradigms, such as Zero-day malware written com-
pletely from scratch using algorithms that share absolutely no functional logic with
existing families in DKB. The embedding model might ﬂag general anomalous behav-
ior, but accurate attribution remains impossible without an established prior reference
point.
27

The Static Analysis Barrier
The framework relies on the availability of disassembled machine code. The sys-
tem handles standard packing through generic unpacking layers, yet it fails against
binaries protected by Virtualization Obfuscation (e.g., VMProtect, Themida). These
protectors translate native instructions into custom bytecode interpreted by a virtual
machine. This translation destroys the semantic mapping our LLM requires. Such
samples necessitate a specialized devirtualization pre-processing step before they can
enter the analysis pipeline.
Computational Throughput vs. Latency
Deploying deep semantic models introduces tangible trade-oﬀs with inference speed.
Lightweight feature-based models (e.g., EMBER) easily classify thousands of sam-
ples per second on a standard CPU. AsmRAG, however, is highly compute-intensive.
The primary bottleneck occurs during the Encoding Step. Generating embeddings for
a binary containing 1,000 distinct functions using Qwen-3 requires signiﬁcant GPU
resources. The retrieval step (FAISS) scales logarithmically, but the initial encoding
limits AsmRAG’s utility as a real-time endpoint scanner. Its optimal deployment is as a
Tier-2 Analysis System in the cloud, receiving and processing prioritized alerts ﬂagged
by lighter Tier-1 sensors.
6 Related Work
We situate AsmRAG at the intersection of deep binary representation, neural malware
detection, and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). The framework distinguishes
itself through a primary focus on granular operational semantics alongside veriﬁed
resilience against adaptive evasion tactics (Table 11).
Table 11 Comparative Taxonomy of Deep Representation and Detection Architectures
against the AsmRAG Desiderata.
Paradigm
Framework
GE
AR
Architecture
Train
Binary Rep.
Safe [10], Asm2Vec [21]
×
×
Embedding
•
jTrans [9], Nova [22]
×
×
Transformer
•
BinEye [23]
×
×
CNN
•
Holistic ML
MalDozer [24], PetaDroid [25]
×
×
RNN/CNN
•
SwiftR [6], MalDy [26]
×
×
Hybrid DNN
•
RAG-Based
CyberRAG [27] (Textual)
×
N/A
LLM+RAG
◦
AsmRAG (Ours)
✓
✓
LLM+RAG
◦
Notes. GE = Granular Evidence (Retrieval of Implementation); AR = Adversarial Resilience
(Resistance to Syntactic/Global Noise); Arch = Architecture;
Train marks: • (full retraining required), ◦(zero-shot/inference-only).
28

Deep Learning for Binary Representation and Authorship
Early embeddings such as Safe [10] and Asm2Vec [21] initiated eﬀorts to bridge the
semantic gap. Recent Transformer architectures (jTrans [9], Nova [22]) apply con-
trastive learning to capture speciﬁc control-ﬂow semantics. Researchers have also
applied deep learning to binary authorship attribution. BinEye [23], for example,
applies convolutional neural networks to bytecode representations to identify compiler
artifacts and author coding styles. These representation models create robust latent
spaces for reverse engineering yet introduce signiﬁcant semantic blindness when fac-
ing adversarial perturbations. Such models frequently use aggressive tokenization that
discards essential forensic artifacts (e.g., cryptographic constants) and lack mecha-
nisms to ﬁlter out benign statically linked libraries. AsmRAG addresses these limitations
by applying a Semantic Library Filtering mechanism to remove benign code. This ﬁl-
tering directly improves the signal-to-noise ratio typically found in general-purpose
models, grounding the subsequent analysis in a veriﬁable threat model.
Sequence-Based and Holistic Detection Paradigms
Current malware classiﬁcation predominantly uses NLP-inspired deep learning models
to process execution traces and API method sequences [28]. Frameworks includ-
ing MalDozer [24, 29], PetaDroid [25], and Cypider [30] demonstrate the value
of neural networks and community-graph detection for mobile threat attribution.
Cross-platform systems like SwiftR [6] and MalDy [26] combine static intermedi-
ate representations with dynamic behavioral reports. These hybrid methods counter
ransomware and highly obfuscated binaries, advancing the capabilities of earlier fuzzy-
hashing ﬁngerprinting systems (e.g., ROAR [31]). These architectures achieve high
discriminative accuracy but create severe diﬃculties for analysts attempting to extract
explicit forensic evidence. The models compress the input space into opaque latent
vectors, erasing any structural mapping back to the underlying assembly code. This
compression leaves them fundamentally vulnerable to global syntactic noise injection,
such as simple overlay appending. AsmRAG addresses these speciﬁc limitations by shift-
ing from holistic classiﬁcation to Granular Retrieval. The system abandons monolithic
ﬁle analysis in favor of isolating speciﬁc malicious functions. This approach retrieves
the exact “Needle” rather than probabilistically classifying the entire “Haystack,”
ensuring defensible interpretability against strategic adversaries.
RAG: From Text to Assembly
Applying RAG successfully grounds Large Language Models in veriﬁable data, though
cybersecurity applications have historically restricted this technique entirely to the
textual domain. Existing systems typically focus on retrieving unstructured Cyber
Threat Intelligence (CTI) or formal CVE reports [27, 32, 33]. AsmRAG transposes this
retrieval concept directly into the low-level assembly domain. Where prior systems
perform Retrieval of Description (returning text about known attacks), our method
executes the Retrieval of Implementation (returning raw operational semantics). The
system achieves this by parsing and retrieving speciﬁc code constructs. This archi-
tectural shift maintains stability against syntactic variation and directly resolves the
29

“Black Box” attribution problem. The system outputs veriﬁable, diﬀerential assembly
analysis as concrete forensic evidence to counter active evasion attempts.
7 Conclusion
Traditional classiﬁcation provides baseline accuracy yet frequently results in opaque
and brittle analysis. We present AsmRAG, a framework that reformulates malware
detection into a transparent, evidence-based retrieval process. The system uses an
Assembly-Specialized LLM to isolate targeted “Atomic Evidence” instead of rely-
ing on easily manipulated global statistics. AsmRAG eﬀectively bridges the semantic
gap, achieving a detection F1-score of 96% alongside an attribution F1-score of
95%. The evaluation demonstrates signiﬁcant stability against metamorphic obfus-
cation when compared to established baselines like EMBER. We introduce the
concept of Assembly-Level Retrieval-Augmented Generation, shifting the analytical
focus away from retrieving textual descriptions and toward identifying veriﬁable code
implementations. This approach successfully restores the causal link missing in auto-
mated analysis. It provides security analysts with the explicit forensic explainability
necessary to maintain a robust Active Defense.