RAVEN: Retrieval-Augmented Vulnerability
Exploration Network for Memory Corruption
Analysis in User Code and Binary Programs
Parteek Jamwal2,∗, Minghao Shao1,2,∗, Boyuan Chen1,2,∗, Achyuta Muthuvelan2 Asini Subanya2
Boubacar Ballo2 Kashish Satija2 Mariam Shafey2 Mohamed Mahmoud2 Moncif Dahaji Bouffi2
Pasindu Wickramasinghe2 Siyona Goel2 Yaakulya Sabbani2 Hakim Hacid3 Mthandazo Ndhlovu3
Eleanna Kafeza3 Sanjay Rawat3 Muhammad Shafique2
1New York University, USA
2New York University Abu Dhabi, UAE
3Technology Innovation Institute, UAE
Abstract—Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated
remarkable capabilities across various cybersecurity tasks, in-
cluding vulnerability classification, detection, and patching. How-
ever, their potential in automated vulnerability report documen-
tation and analysis remains underexplored. We present RAVEN
(Retrieval Augmented Vulnerability Exploration Network), a
framework leveraging LLM agents and Retrieval Augmented
Generation (RAG) to synthesize comprehensive vulnerability
analysis reports. Given vulnerable source code, RAVEN generates
reports following the Google Project Zero Root Cause Analysis
template. The framework uses four modules: an Explorer agent
for vulnerability identification, a RAG engine retrieving relevant
knowledge from curated databases including Google Project Zero
reports and CWE entries, an Analyst agent for impact and ex-
ploitation assessment, and a Reporter agent for structured report
generation. To ensure quality, RAVEN includes a task specific
LLM Judge evaluating reports across structural integrity, ground
truth alignment, code reasoning quality, and remediation quality.
We evaluate RAVEN on 105 vulnerable code samples covering
15 CWE types from the NIST-SARD dataset. Results show an
average quality score of 54.21%, supporting the effectiveness of
our approach for automated vulnerability documentation.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated trans-
formative capabilities across a wide spectrum of domains,
reshaping how we approach natural language processing, code
generation, and reasoning [1]. In cybersecurity, LLMs have
been applied to vulnerability detection in source code [2],
penetration testing automation [3], automated program repair
[4] and agent-based attack/defense for simulating real-world
cybersecurity scenarios [5]. These efforts highlight the grow-
ing integration of LLMs into security workflows.
Despite these advances, the application of LLMs in gen-
erating comprehensive vulnerability analysis reports remains
underexplored. Professional security organizations such as
Google produce detailed reports documenting root cause
analyses, exploitation techniques, and remediation strategies
[6]. These reports follow structured templates capturing key
information such as vulnerability summaries, attack surfaces,
exploit primitives, and patch guidance. However, automating
∗Authors contributed equally to this work.
Explorer
Analyst
Judge
Reporter
RAG Engine
Structured 
Data
Data Pipeline
Structured 
Data
Vector 
Database
Vulnerable 
Code 
Snippet
Vulnerability 
Report
Web Data, 
Books
Fig. 1: Architectural Overview of RAVEN. (1) a Data Collection
Pipeline that transforms raw web pages and PDFs into a structured
format (2) a RAG Engine that indexes the structured data into a
vector database for retrieval (3) an Agentic System that takes in
the vulnerable code snippet and generates a comprehensive, Google
Project Zero Style Vulnerability Report.
the synthesis of such reports using LLMs introduces chal-
lenges that have not been adequately addressed.
Automated vulnerability report generation presents three
core challenges. First, it requires integrating multiple subtasks,
including vulnerability classification, root cause analysis, ex-
ploitation assessment, and patch synthesis, into a single coher-
ent report, which is more complex than solving each subtask
in isolation. Second, vulnerability analysis often depends on
extended code contexts, call chains, and cross-file depen-
dencies, demanding robust long-context reasoning; yet LLMs
can suffer from the “lost in the middle” phenomenon when
critical evidence appears in the middle of long inputs. Third,
evaluating generated reports is inherently multi-dimensional,
for example factual accuracy, technical depth, and remediation
validity, and building automated evaluation frameworks for
such domain-specific outputs remains an open problem.
To address these challenges, we propose RAVEN (Retrieval
Augmented Vulnerability Exploration Network), a multi agent
framework that leverages LLMs and Retrieval Augmented
Generation (RAG) to automatically synthesize comprehensive
vulnerability analysis reports. RAVEN implements a four
arXiv:2604.17948v1 [cs.CR] 20 Apr 2026

phase agentic workflow comprising an Explorer agent for ini-
tial vulnerability identification and CWE classification, a RAG
engine that retrieves relevant vulnerability knowledge from
curated databases including Google Project Zero reports and
MITRE CWE entries, an Analyst agent for in depth impact and
exploitation assessment, and a Reporter agent that generates
structured reports following the Google Project Zero Root
Cause Analysis template. To ensure report quality, RAVEN
incorporates a task specific LLM as a Judge module that
evaluates generated reports across four dimensions: structural
integrity, ground truth alignment, code reasoning quality, and
remediation quality.
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) We propose RAVEN, a novel multi-agent framework that
integrates RAG with LLM agents to automate the synthesis
of professional-grade vulnerability analysis reports.
2) We design a comprehensive evaluation framework utiliz-
ing LLM-as-a-Judge methodology to assess vulnerability
reports across multiple quality dimensions.
3) We conduct extensive experiments on the NIST-SARD
dataset, demonstrating RAVEN’s effectiveness in generat-
ing accurate and comprehensive vulnerability reports across
diverse CWE categories.
II. RELATED WORKS
LLM-based Vulnerability Detection for Code. LLMs
have shown promising capabilities in identifying source code
security vulnerabilities. Early approaches leveraged encoder-
only models such as CodeBERT [7] and GraphCodeBERT
[8] for vulnerability classification tasks, while recent work
has shifted toward decoder-only architectures including GPT-4
and CodeLlama [9]. Studies demonstrate LLMs can perform
vulnerability detection through prompt engineering and chain-
of-thought reasoning [10], though comprehensive evaluations
reveal that current models still struggle with reliable iden-
tification and reasoning about security flaws, particularly in
complex, multi-file contexts [11], [12]. Multi-model collabo-
ration approaches such as M2CVD [13] and mixture-of-experts
frameworks [14] have been proposed to enhance detection
accuracy across diverse CWE categories.
LLM-based Program Repair/Fix. Automated program
repair using LLMs has emerged as an active research area.
VRpilot [4] introduced chain-of-thought prompting combined
with iterative patch validation feedback, demonstrating im-
provements over baseline techniques for vulnerability repair
in C and Java. VulRepair [15] applied T5-based models
for automated software vulnerability repair, while subsequent
work explored few-shot learning [16] and fine-tuning strate-
gies [17]. Recent studies have also investigated the integration
of static analyzers with LLMs to improve patch quality and
reduce false positives [18]. However, challenges remain in
generating patches that correctly address root causes without
breaking functionality, particularly for complex vulnerabilities
tied to project-specific design patterns [19].
LLM Agents for Security Tasks. Multi-agent LLM sys-
tems have been developed to automate complex security
workflows. PentestGPT [3] pioneered modular task decom-
position for penetration testing, utilizing a pentesting task
tree for structured reasoning. PentestAgent [20] extended this
paradigm by incorporating Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) to enhance domain knowledge [21] and automate
intelligence gathering, vulnerability analysis, and exploitation
stages. Related multi-agent approaches have also been ex-
plored in adjacent domains, including hardware design [22],
offensive security [23], and vulnerability detection [2]. These
frameworks leverage RAG to retrieve relevant vulnerability
information from curated databases, mitigating the limitations
of LLM context windows and outdated training knowledge.
Similar multi-agent architectures have been applied to red
teaming and defensive security applications [24].
LLM-as-a-Judge for Evaluation. Evaluating the quality of
LLM-generated security analyses presents unique challenges
due to the domain-specific nature of vulnerability reports. The
LLM-as-a-Judge paradigm [25] offers a scalable alternative
to manual annotation by employing LLMs to assess outputs
across multiple dimensions. This approach has been adopted
for evaluating code generation quality, vulnerability detection
rationales, patch correctness [26] and agentic tasks
[27],
[28]. While LLM judges demonstrate strong agreement with
human evaluators on well-defined criteria, concerns remain
regarding their robustness to adversarial manipulations and
their reliability in out-of-domain scenarios [29].
Our work differs from prior approaches by integrating
these components into a unified framework for comprehensive
vulnerability report generation, combining multi-agent collab-
oration with RAG-enhanced retrieval and systematic LLM-
based evaluation across multiple quality dimensions.
III. METHODOLOGY
RAVEN’s architecture consists of three major technical
components, each addressing a distinct challenge in automated
vulnerability analysis. These are (i). Data Collection Pipeline
(ii). RAG Engine (iii). Agentic Framework. All these modules
are discussed in detail in the subsequent sections.
A. Data Collection Pipeline
In this section, we’ll describe our approach for automated
data collection techniques from webpages and books.
1) Google Project Zero: Through an extensive analysis
of publicly available detailed vulnerability reports, we found
Google Project Zero’s 0-days-in-the-wild repository [6] con-
sisting of 70 reports detailing the essential reasoning behind
various 0-day exploits.
To extract the content from the reports, we first retrieve
all URLs from the Google Project Zero homepage using the
Crawl4AI library [30]. A BFS (Breadth-First Search) deep
crawling strategy with a depth level of 2 is used. This crawling
process yields 89 unique same-domain URLs. On manual
inspection of these URLs, we noticed that some of these links
point to non-report sources. Therefore, to retain links that only
contain the reports, we define a custom regex filter. Using this

URL 
Extraction
Regex 
Filtering
Web 
Scraper
LLM 
Google 
Project Zero 
Webpage
89 URLs 
Extracted
70 Report 
URLs
Unstructured 
Markdown
Cleaned, RAG-
Ready Markdown.
PDF-to-
Image 
Conversion
OCR
Custom 
Index 
Creation
Document 
Consolidation
CWE Mitre 
Book
PNG 
Images
Markdown 
Docs
Table of 
Contents
Fig. 2: Data Collection Pipeline. (Top) URL extraction and web
scraping of security reports; (Bottom) PDF-to-markdown conversion
using OCR and Table of Contents (TOC) indexing. The final output
is a cleaned, structured markdown for RAG.
filter, we go from 89 to 70 valid CVE report links which are
saved for report content extraction.
https://googleprojectzero.github.io/0days-in-the-wild/0d
ay-RCAs/YYYY/CVE-YYYY-####.html
Similarly to the URL extraction phase, a BFS deep-crawling
strategy with a depth of 1 is used to ensure that all content
from the target URL and the embedded links within the
original report, such as cited advisories, GitHub repositories,
and other relevant links, are captured. A list of HTML
tags and CSS selectors (e.g., navigation bar, footer, etc.)
to avoid is also specified. All embedded URL content is
encapsulated within structural tags: <START OF CONTENT
FOR [URL]> and <END OF CONTENT FOR [URL]>. To
manage redundancy, the embedded URL content is limited
to three appearances per report; subsequent instances of the
same URL are skipped to prevent unnecessary context window
inflation. The output of this process is 70 markdown files, each
containing the raw text of the vulnerability reports.
Lastly, we perform an LLM-based cleaning of the raw
reports to transform them into structured, RAG-ready vul-
nerability documents. All these files are passed to an LLM
along with a specialized ≈6200 token prompt that guides it
on how to parse, clean, and format the raw scraped content
into a consistent schema optimized for Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG).
2) CWE Mitre Book: In addition to Google Project Zero
vulnerability reports, we also included a 2,735-page PDF
released by MITRE [31] that includes 1,387 weakness entries
in our list of datasets to ingest into the RAG engine. To
transform this PDF into RAG-ready knowledge base, we
implemented the following three stage pipeline
1) PDF to Image Conversion: Every page of the PDF was
exported as an individual PNG file using the pdf2image
library, resulting in 2,735 PNG images.
2) OCR Processing: Each saved image is then processed by
Chandra [32], a highly accurate OCR model that converts
images and PDFs into structured markdown while preserv-
ing layout information. Since the book contains tabular
data, code blocks, and complex data layouts, this model
CHUNKER 
Flat, Contextual, 
HyPE 
ChromaDB 
Vector 
Store
Documents
C1
C2
C3
C4
User
Query
C2
C4
C1
C3
Query + 
Context
LLM
Chunks
Retrieved Chunks
Reranked Chunks
RERANKER 
Cross-encoder, 
LLM Based 
C1
C2
C3
C4
RETRIEVER 
embeddings, 
hybrid, 
HyPE 
Fig. 3: Overview of RAVEN’s RAG Engine. It comprises 3 chunking
strategies (Flat, Contextual, HyPE), 3 retrieval methods (Embeddings,
Hybrid, HyPE) and 2 rerankers (Cross-encoder, LLM-based).
was perfectly suited for high-fidelity text extraction.
3) Knowledge Base Consolidation: At this stage, we have
2,735 markdown documents, one for each page of the PDF.
Using the markdown documents for the Table of Contents
from the book, we task the LLM to generate an index
containing the Chapter Name, Start page, and End page.
The index is then used to create chapter specific documents.
B. RAG Engine
RAVEN’s RAG engine implements a modular architecture
comprising three chunking, three retrieval, and two ranking
components, all built upon ChromaDB as the persistent vector
database with HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World)
indexing for efficient approximate nearest neighbor search. For
document ingestion, we first have a flat chunking approach,
which uses a fixed-size sliding window on a given document,
thereby splitting it into arbitrary fixed-size windows of text.
Next, we have the Contextual Chunking strategy based on
Anthropic’s Contextual Retrieval [33] approach. The idea is to
prepend an LLM-generated chunk-specific explanatory context
in relation to the entire document, usually 50-100 tokens, to
each chunk before embedding and saving it to the vector
database. Lastly, we have the HyPE (Hypothetical Prompt
Embeddings) approach, where 3-5 hypothetical, chunk-specific
questions are generated for each document chunk, produced by
the flat chunking strategy. These generated hypothetical ques-
tions become the chunk’s representation. Consequently, the
retrieval process for the HyPE strategy shifts from query-to-
document to query-to-hypothetical questions. Once the chunks
are created, they are converted into embeddings, except for
the HyPE approach, where the hypothetical questions are
embedded instead of document chunks.
Moving on to the retrieval process, we first implemented a
standard embedding-based approach, where we perform a pure
vector-based similarity search between the embedded query
and the ingested chunks. Building on this, we have the hybrid
approach, where we combine semantic (vector) search and
keyword (BM25) search scores for enhanced retrieval. We use
the following scoring mechanism
scorefinal = wsemantic · scoresemantic + wkeyword · scorekeyword (1)
where the default weights are 0.6 for semantic and 0.4 for
keyword components. Lastly, we have the HyPE retrieval

strategy that performs query-to-generated-hypothetical ques-
tion matching.
Once the initial set of chunks is retrieved, it is passed
into the Reranker module, which plays a crucial role in
refining the results obtained from the initial retrieval process.
RAVEN’s RAG Engine comprises two reranking modules,
namely a Cross-Encoder based reranker where the query and
the document are jointly processed to compute the relevance
score. Cisco’s SecureBERT 2.0 [34] which is a domain-
specific transformer model optimized for cybersecurity tasks
is used as the Cross-Encoder model. In addition to the Cross
Encoder, we also have a pointwise LLM-based reranker that
scores document relevance on a 0–10 scale.
C. Agentic Workflow
RAVEN implements a four-phase multi-agent system for
automated vulnerability analysis and report generation. The
workflow comprises four phases: Exploration, Analysis, Re-
port Generation, and Report Evaluation via LLM as a Judge.
The workflow begins by providing the Explorer Agent
with a filepath to the vulnerable code snippet. The agent
invokes ingest_codebase function and extracts all source
code, storing it in the code_payload variable. Once ex-
tracted, the explorer agent uses the code snippet as the
query and calls rag_retrieval function, thereby re-
trieving the most relevant documents from the RAG En-
gine. The retrieved context and extracted code are fed into
generate_explorer_findings resulting in the LLM
generating an initial set of findings comprising (1) a concise
vulnerability class summary, (2) matching Common Weakness
Enumeration (CWE) standards, (3) Common Vulnerability
Enumeration (CVE) identifiers, (4) evidence (line number,
snippet, and reason) of where the issue resides, and (5)
recommended remediation steps for immediate mitigation.
Once we have the initial set of explorer agent findings,
ExplorerFindings, we use it along with the initial ex-
tracted code_payload data and feed it to the analyst agent,
which invokes the analyze function. The LLM yields an en-
hanced set of findings built upon the Explorer Agent’s output.
These include (1) an impact assessment of the vulnerability, (2)
likelihood of exploitation, (3) critical hotspots, (4) confidence
level in the analysis, and most importantly, (5) remediation
strategies (fixes) for the currently detected vulnerability and
its future variants.
Upon successful generation of the analyst agent’s findings,
AnalystFindings, these findings, in conjunction with
the initial code payload, code_payload, and the explorer
agent’s findings, ExplorerFindings, are provided as con-
text to the reporter agent for detailed vulnerability report
generation. The report generation happens in three phases:
1) Vulnerability Analysis: Based on the provided consoli-
dated context, the agent determines whether a vulnerability
exists. If it exists, the agent generates a short descriptive
title of the detected vulnerability, a 2-4 sentence summary
of where the issue appeared, how it was triggered, etc.,
CWE description of the vulnerability, root cause, impact
summary, attack surface (potential entry points an attacker
could exploit to trigger a vulnerability), and lastly the
vulnerable snippet from the original code where the bug
resides.
2) Exploit Analysis: The agent uses Phase 1’s findings
to produce the attack vector (specific path an attacker
takes to execute the exploit), exploit primitives (the low-
level capabilities gained upon successful triggering of the
vulnerability), exploit steps (a list of 3-5 exploit steps
describing how the vulnerability could be triggered), and
an exploitability summary.
3) Fix Generation: The agent takes the output produced
in the earlier two phases and uses it to produce the
remediation artifacts. More specifically, the agent produces
a code snippet (<20 lines) that directly addresses the root
cause, an explanation of how/why the fix eliminates the
vulnerability, and lastly, the variant guidance, i.e., steps on
dealing with future variants of the same exploit.
The output from all three phases is consolidated, fed to a
custom markdown renderer to create the final report, and then
is evaluated by the Judge agent. The report format is inspired
by Google Project Zero’s RCA template.
The judge agent uses the original extracted code, ground
truth annotation (comes with the original dataset), and the
generated report to give its evaluation. This agent utilizes 2
LLMs, Claude 4.5 Sonnet and Gemini 3.1 Pro each possessing
specialized evaluation capabilities to evaluate the generated
report across 4 dimensions.
• Structural Integrity (0–10): This metric measures how well
the generated report adheres to the provided guidelines and
the completeness of mandatory fields.
• Ground Truth Alignment/Factual Grounding (0–10):
This metric evaluates factual correctness strictly against
provided annotation and source code. Score of 0 for hal-
lucinated CVEs.
• Code Reasoning Quality (0–10): This metric assesses the
technical depth, specificity, and logical consistency of the
report’s reasoning.
• Remediation Quality (0–10): This metric measures how
valid the proposed fix code is relative to the identified root
cause in the ground truth annotation.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. LLM Selection
As outlined in Section III-C, the agentic system operates
in four phases: Exploration, Analysis, Report Generation, and
Report Evaluation. For the first three phases, we use the
same LLM. All experiments are conducted exclusively on
Falcon models, Falcon-H1R-7B [35] (F16), Falcon-H1-7B-
Instruct (F16), Falcon-H1-34B-Instruct (Q8), and Falcon3-
10B-Instruct (F16), released by the Technology Innovation
Institute (TII).
B. Parameters and Features
For all Falcon models, a temperature of 0.6 and top-p of
0.95 is used. The RAG engine ingests 70 Google Project Zero

ingest_code
Description: Given a ﬁle 
path, this function extracts 
the code and stores it in 
code_payload.
rag_retrieval
Description: Using 
code_payload as the query, 
this function invokes a call 
within the RAG engine and 
returns rag_ﬁndings.
generate_explorer_ﬁndings
Description: Using code_payload + 
rag_ﬁndings, the agent generates 
the explorer_agent_ﬁndings.
generate_analyst_ﬁndings 
Description: Given the code_payload + 
explorer_agent_ﬁndings, this agent 
generates the analyst_agent_ﬁndings.
generate_report 
Description: Given the code_payload, 
explorer_agent_ﬁndings, and 
analyst_agent_ﬁndings this agent produces the 
generated report. Report Generation is 
performed in 3 phases.
Report Phase 2: Exploit Analysis
Report Phase 3: Fix Generation
evaluate_report
Description: Given the generated report, this agent evaluates it 
across 4 dimensions using 2 LLMs and provides a score.
Structural Integrity
Remediation Quality
test.cpp
> void function1(char *){
... 
}
RAG Engine
{
 summary: “ ”,
 cwe_tags: “ ”, 
 cwe_tags: “ ”,
 cve_candidates: “”,
 evidence: “ ”, 
 next_steps: “”
}
RAG Database 
[Document(“CVE119: This is 
a critical software 
vulnerability…), Document 
(“Buffer Overflow is a …”)
(1) EXPLORER
(2) ANALYST
(3) REPORTER
{
 impact: “ “,
 likelihood: “ ”, 
 hotspots: “ ”,
 remediation: “”,
 confidence: “ ”, 
}
VULNERABILITY
- CWE Description
- Summary
- Root Cause
- Attack Surface
- Impact Summary
EXPLOIT
- Attack Vector
- Exploit Primitive(s)
- Exploitability Summary
- Exploit Flow
FIX
- Fix Code
- Fix Summary / Patch Analysis 
- Variant Guidance
(4) JUDGE
Report Phase 1: Vulnerability Analysis
Factual Grounding
Code Reasoning 
Quality
Source 
Code
Analyst 
Findings
CWE-119
Ground Truth Annotation: Character 
array stack overﬂow from constant 
index upper-bound write
GroundTruthAnnotation
ExplorerFindings
FinalReport
ExplorerFindings
Source Code
Fig. 4: The RAVEN Agentic Pipeline. It orchestrates four specialized agents for end-to-end vulnerability analysis: (1) the Explorer reads
the vulnerable code & queries the RAG engine to generate initial findings; (2) the Analyst refines these findings by assessing impact and
likelihood; (3) the Reporter synthesizes a three-phase report (vulnerability, exploit, and fix); and (4) the Judge scores the final output against
ground truth across four qualitative dimensions
reports and 1,321 chapters extracted from the 2,735 CWE
MITRE PDFs into the vector database. For flat chunking, a
chunk size of 2000 characters with an overlap of 200 charac-
ters is used. For the contextual chunking approach, the LLM-
generated contextual summaries prepended to each chunk are
limited to 200 characters. The HyPE strategy generates 3 hypo-
thetical queries per chunk, each capped at 200 characters. The
Grok 4.1-Fast model is used as the LLM-reranker and chunk
context generator. All retrieval-based methods are designed
to retrieve top_k candidates. With the reranker enabled, the
retriever retrieves top_k × num_candidates documents,
reranks them, and augments the query with top_k ranked
documents. The values of top_k and num_candidates are
set to 10 and 2, respectively. For hybrid retrieval, the semantic
and keyword weights are set to 0.6 and 0.4, respectively.
C. Benchmark
To evaluate how well RAVEN’s agentic system is able to
identify the vulnerability within a given code snippet and
generate a detailed report with the fix, we use the NIST-SARD
dataset [36]. It is a large scale dataset curated by NIST as part
of the SAMATE project. It contains approximately 450,000
programs covering more than 150 classes of weaknesses. Each
test case is packaged with source code and a manifest file
containing the case metadata used as ground truth to assess
the system’s factual correctness. The evaluation is performed
on 105 memory focused vulnerable samples from the dataset.
The composition of our dataset mixture is shown in Table I.
D. Metrics
The agentic system is evaluated only using LLM-as-a-Judge
scores. The judging metrics are Structural Integrity (0-10),
Ground-Truth Alignment (0-10), Code Reasoning Quality (0-
10) and Remediation Quality (0-10)
TABLE I: Test Set Vulnerability Distribution by CWE Type
CWE
Description
%
CWE-119
Improper Restriction of Operations
31.43
CWE-787
Out-of-bounds Write
6.67
CWE-476
NULL Pointer Dereference
6.67
CWE-457
Use of Uninitialized Variable
6.67
CWE-416
Use After Free
6.67
CWE-170
Improper Null Termination
6.67
CWE-122
Heap-based Buffer Overflow
6.67
CWE-121
Stack-based Buffer Overflow
6.67
CWE-120
Buffer Copy without Checking Size of Input
6.67
CWE-415
Double Free
5.71
CWE-401
Missing Release of Memory
5.71
CWE-193
Off-by-one Error
0.95
CWE-126
Buffer Over-read
0.95
CWE-124
Buffer Underwrite
0.95
CWE-123
Write-what-where Condition
0.95
V. RESULTS
We evaluated 4 Falcon models across 10 RAG configu-
rations, resulting in 40 experiments. Each experiment was
performed on 105 samples. For every sample, two independent
judges generate scores for four dimensions: Structural Integrity
(SI), Factual Grounding (FG), Code Reasoning Quality (CR),
and Remediation Quality (RQ).
Let JSI
1 , JGT
1
, JCR
1
, JRQ
1
denote the scores assigned by
Judge 1, and JSI
2 , JGT
2
, JCR
2
, JGT
2
, JCR
2
, JRQ
2
denote the cor-
responding scores assigned by Judge 2. The overall model
score Soverall is computed as the arithmetic mean of all eight
criterion scores and is given by:
Soverall = 1
8
2
X
i=1

JSI
i
+ JGT
i
+ JCR
i
+ JRQ
i

.
Table II shows the overall scores, Soverall, of the models.
It is clear from the table that there is no specific RAG
configuration that outperforms the others. To gain a deeper
insight into the overall scores, we pick a model and analyze

TABLE II: Comparison of Falcon Models Across RAG Architectures (Overall Score) Soverall
Model
Flat Chunking
Contextual Chunking
HyPE
EO
+ CE
HYB
+ CE
EO
+ LLM
HYB
+ LLM
EO
+ CE
HYB
+ CE
EO
+ LLM
HYB
+ LLM
HyPE
+ CE
HyPE
+ LLM
Falcon H1 34B Instruct
7.45
7.59
7.43
7.54
7.68
7.62
7.41
7.65
7.44
7.34
Falcon H1R 7B
7.13
7.32
7.03
7.09
6.73
7.07
7.16
7.29
6.95
6.96
Falcon H1 7B Instruct
6.80
6.66
6.77
6.82
6.50
6.66
6.80
6.76
6.90
6.77
Falcon 3 10B Instruct
5.83
5.81
5.91
5.85
5.93
5.72
6.10
6.11
5.78
5.90
Abbreviations: EO = embeddings-only, HYB = hybrid retrieval, CE = cross-encoder reranker, LLM = LLM reranker.
how each configuration affects its performance across specific
dimensions. To choose the model to inspect, we construct a
box plot as depicted in Figure 5 that shows the variance in
the model’s overall scores. The model with the highest score
variance across configurations is picked, thereby allowing
us to understand which RAG components influence model
performance.
Falcon H1 34B
Instruct
Falcon H1 7B
Instruct
Falcon H1R 7B
Falcon 3 10B
Instruct
Model
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
Overall Score
7.58
6.80
7.13
5.93
Score Range: 5.77 - 7.75
Model Performance Comparison: Overall Score Distribution
Legend
Mean
Data Points
Outliers
Fig. 5: Box Plot Analysis of Overall Scores for all Falcon Models
From the box plot in Figure 5, we can see that the Falcon
H1R-7B model exhibits the highest variance compared to
the other models. Therefore, we select this model for further
analysis of its individual dimensions.
A. Structural Integrity
]]
It is evident from the heatmap shown in Figure 6 that
the Falcon H1R model consistently adhered to the required
formatting guidelines across different RAG configurations.
Upon examining the judge agent’s evaluation logs to identify
the causes of point deductions, we found that these were
primarily due to two factors:
• Formatting issues: Corrupted code rendering, truncated
fixes (e.g., missing braces or incomplete function defini-
tions), and the use of literal escape sequences (e.g., \n)
instead of actual line breaks.
• False negatives: Incorrectly classifying a vulnerable code
snippet as non-vulnerable, which results in an automatic
score of zero for the corresponding evaluation.
B. Ground Truth Alignment / Factual Grounding
Figure 6 illustrates that the Contextual Chunking + Hybrid
Retrieval + LLM Reranker configuration (score=6.14) achieves
the highest overall score, closely followed by Contextual
Chunking + Embeddings-Based Retrieval + LLM Reranker
(score=6.02) and Flat Chunking + Embeddings-Only Retrieval
+ Cross Encoder Reranker (score=5.98).
The strong performance of Contextual Chunking + Hybrid
Retrieval + LLM Reranker configuration can be attributed to
the fact that each chunk is accompanied by a semantically
rich LLM-generated context, thereby enhancing the chunk’s
representation. During retrieval, the hybrid strategy combines
semantic similarity with keyword-based matching (BM25),
enabling the retrieval of a wide range of documents. Given
that the input to the RAG engine is a NIST-SARD code
snippet, the retrieved set of documents may contain some
unrelated/noisy matches due to superficial similarities (shared
variable names, function calls, etc.). The initial set of retrievals
is then fed to the LLM-based reranker. Given the inherent
reasoning capabilities of the LLMs along with the context-
enhanced chunk, the reranker is able to generate optimal
rankings for the provided query, leading to factually grounded
answers (score=6.14). Cross encoders, a class of deterministic
rerankers, compute pairwise relevance by calculating the full
token-level interactions between query and document. Due to
the absence of explicit logical reasoning, the final ranked set
of retrievals does not contribute to a high Factual Grounding
score (score=5.53). Our empirical findings suggest that addi-
tional context confounds the cross encoder’s relevance scor-
ing for the H1R model. This performance disparity between
the rerankers for contextual chunks can also be viewed by
switching the retrieval strategy from hybrid to embeddings-
only where an LLM Reranker (score=6.02) outperforms the
cross encoder(score=5.47).
Upon analyzing the Flat Chunking + Embeddings-Only Re-
trieval + Cross Encoder Reranker configuration (score=5.98),
we observe that when retrieving documents using this strategy,
the search space for the retriever is limited to a set of
context-free chunks. Consequently, the likelihood of retrieving
unrelated chunks is slightly higher, as there is no additional
contextual information guiding the retriever’s decisions. In
such cases, the domain-specific cross-encoder reranker, Se-
cureBERT 2.0 (score= 5.98) outperforms the LLM reranker
(score=5.78). Switching the retrieval method from hybrid to an
embedding-only approach yields similar performance results.

E+C
E+L
H+C
H+L
HyPE+C
HyPE+L
Retriever + Reranker
Ctx
Flat
HyPE
Chunker Type
8.67
9.14
9.04
8.91
0.0
0.0
9.26
9.21
9.18
8.92
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
9.04
8.97
Structural Integrity
E+C
E+L
H+C
H+L
HyPE+C
HyPE+L
Retriever + Reranker
Ctx
Flat
HyPE
Chunker Type
5.47
6.02
5.53
6.14
0.0
0.0
5.79
5.70
5.98
5.78
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
5.57
5.50
Factual Grounding
E+C
E+L
H+C
H+L
HyPE+C
HyPE+L
Retriever + Reranker
Ctx
Flat
HyPE
Chunker Type
6.41
7.00
7.01
7.10
0.0
0.0
6.86
6.79
7.32
7.09
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.80
6.74
Code Reasoning Quality
E+C
E+L
H+C
H+L
HyPE+C
HyPE+L
Retriever + Reranker
Ctx
Flat
HyPE
Chunker Type
6.37
6.47
6.70
6.98
0.0
0.0
6.63
6.40
6.80
6.58
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
6.40
6.64
Remediation Quality
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
H1R - Average Scores (4 Dimensions)
Fig. 6: Falcon H1R-7B Individual Dimension Scores across all RAG Configurations (Abbreviations: E = embeddings-only, H = hybrid
retrieval, C = cross-encoder reranker, L = LLM reranker, Ctx=Contextual Chunker)
C. Code Reasoning
The results of the analysis performed in Section V-B are also
reflected here. The Contextual Chunking + Hybrid Retrieval +
LLM Reranker (score=7.10) and Flat Chunking + Hybrid Re-
trieval + Cross Encoder Reranker (score=7.32) outperform all
other configurations leading to high Code Reasoning Quality
for the Falcon H1R model.
D. Remediation Quality
The trend visualized in Section V-B is clearly visible here
as well. The Contextual Chunking + Hybrid Retrieval + LLM
Reranker (score=6.98) and Flat Chunking + Hybrid Retrieval
+ Cross Encoder Reranker (score=6.80) are the top performing
RAG configurations for this criteria.
E. CWE Remediation Statistics
To evaluate the quality of the fixes generated by each
model using our proposed agentic system, we first select the
best configurations for each Falcon model, as presented in
Table II. For each selected configuration, we calculate the
proportion of CWEs for which a valid fix was generated. This
assessment is conducted by examining the logs produced by
the Judge Agent. For each test case, the Judge Agent returns
an evaluation in accordance with a predefined template
1
{
2
"structural_integrity": { /* omitted */ },
3
"factual_grounding": { /* omitted */ },
4
"code_reasoning_quality": { /* omitted */ },
5
"remediation_quality": {
6
"score": 0,
7
"justification": "2-3 sentence explanation
.",
8
"fix_addresses_root_cause": false,
9
"syntax_valid": false
10
},
11
"overall_score": 0.0
12
}
Under
the
remediation
quality
criterion,
we
define
two evaluation keys, namely fix_addresses_root and
syntax_valid. These indicate whether the generated fix
addresses the root cause specified in the ground-truth annota-
tion and whether the fix is syntactically valid, respectively. A
remediation is considered successful only if both conditions
are satisfied for both judges. Figure 7 shows the success
ratios for the chosen configs on various CWEs. On average,
RAVEN’s agentic workflow yields a 54.21% remediation
success rate.
Fig. 7: CWE Remediation Fix Analysis Plot
Upon examining the Judge Agent logs for Falcon H1R-7B
and Falcon H1-34B-Instruct, we can observe that
• Falcon H1R-7B: This model consistently generates syn-
tactically correct fixes; however, these fixes often pre-
vent program failure by disabling or bypassing the
problematic behavior rather than directly addressing and
correcting the underlying cause
• Falcon H1-34B-Instruct: This model reliably generates
syntactically valid code, but remediation quality de-

grades when fixes require understanding intent, control
flow, or multi-step reasoning.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented RAVEN, a multi agent frame-
work that combines LLM agents with Retrieval Augmented
Generation to produce structured, professional style vulnera-
bility analysis reports from vulnerable source code. By coor-
dinating an Explorer, a retrieval module grounded in curated
vulnerability knowledge, an Analyst, and a Reporter, RAVEN
supports end to end reasoning from vulnerability identification
to impact assessment and remediation guidance. We also
introduced a task specific LLM as a Judge to evaluate report
quality across structure, alignment with ground truth, code rea-
soning, and remediation. Experiments on NIST-SARD across
diverse CWE categories demonstrate that RAVEN can generate
coherent and technically meaningful reports, indicating its
promise for scaling vulnerability documentation workflows
and assisting human analysts.