Author’s version; presented at the 4th Workshop on Nano Security (at the Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference 2026)
Preventing Distinguishability between 
Multiplication and Squaring Operations 
Alkistis Aikaterini Sigourou1, Zoya Dyka1,2, Peter Langendoerfer2 and Ievgen Kabin1 
1 IHP – Leibniz-Institut für innovative Mikroelektronik, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany 
2 BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, Cottbus, Germany 
{sigourou, dyka, kabin}@ihp-microelectronics.com 
Abstract— Scalar multiplication kP is a critical operation in 
Elliptic Curve Cryptosystems (ECC), often targeted by Side-
Channel Analysis (SCA). Despite strategies based on atomic 
patterns to enhance security, the binary kP algorithms remain 
susceptible to simple SCA due to energy consumption variations 
in field multipliers during passing two different or two identical 
operands. This vulnerability arises independent of the 
multiplication method used. We implemented and analysed two 
mitigation techniques: one involving data redirection and 
another focusing on bus reloading. 
Keywords— 
Elliptic 
Curve 
(EC), 
Elliptic 
Curve 
Cryptosystem (ECC), kP, atomic block, atomic patterns, Simple 
Power Analysis (SPA), Side-Channel Analysis (SCA) attacks. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Elliptic Curve Cryptosystems (ECC) are critical for 
securing communication, utilizing the cryptographic protocols 
for digital signature, authentication and secret key exchange. 
Central to these protocols is the Elliptic Curve (EC) point-
scalar multiplication, which is denoted as kP operation and is 
susceptible to attacks aiming to reveal the secret value of the 
scalar k. To mitigate risks, Hardware Security Modules 
(HSM) have to be resistant to various physical attacks, 
including side-channel attacks (SCA), when attackers have 
physical access to the HSM and can measure and analyse 
power or electromagnetic traces of kP executions. Notably, 
horizontal SCA attacks, which examine a single kP execution 
trace, pose significant threats. Binary kP algorithms are 
mostly implemented in hardware and process the binary value 
of the scalar k bit-by-bit. Attackers by applying visual 
inspection, different statistical, machine learning, or other 
methods, try to distinguish and classify parts of the trace 
related to each bit of k, separating them into two subsets for 
‘0’ and ‘1’ using differences in the slot shapes. Regularity and 
atomicity principles are the basis for countermeasures against 
simple SCA attacks. Regular algorithms such as the 
Montgomery ladder based on [1] or the double-and-add-
always kP algorithm [2] ensure that each bit of the scalar k is 
processed identically, making it difficult to differentiate the 
shape of ‘0’-slots and of ‘1’-slots. Atomic block patterns, for 
example [3], [4], [5], [6], represent each slot as a set of atomic 
blocks (atoms), whereby each atom consists of the same 
sequences of operations. That makes all atoms identical from 
SCA point of view. Hardware implementations of regular and 
atomic pattern binary algorithms are vulnerable to horizontal 
address-bit SCA attacks, with no known effective algorithmic 
countermeasures available [7]. A new marker exploiting the 
distinguishability of multiplication and squaring of finite field 
elements is published in [8], [9]. 
In this paper, we investigate the example of our 
implementation of the kP operation using Longa’s atomic 
patterns [4] to determine whether dummy addressing and data 
flow redirection can enhance the resistance of hardware 
implementations of kP operations. 
II.
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We implemented the binary double-and-add left-to-right 
scalar multiplication algorithm for the NIST P-256 elliptic 
curve using Longa’s atomic patterns [4]. Each of Longa’s 
atomic blocks follows the MNAMNAA sequence of field 
operations, with M = multiplication, N = negation, and A = 
addition. Processing a ‘0’ bit-value of k requires 4 such atoms, 
while processing a ‘1’ bit-value of k consists of 10 atoms. 
Our kP design consists of functional blocks for addition, 
subtraction, and multiplication in the prime finite field GF(p), 
utilizing 256-bit registers for operand storage. A Controller 
organizes the sequence of field operations and data transfers 
between blocks via a multiplexer, ensuring only one block or 
register can transfer its output value to the bus in each clock 
cycle while many blocks can read from it. Using Cadence’s 
SimVision v. 15.20-s053, we synthesised the design for the 
IHP 250 nm cell library SGB25V for a clock cycle period of 
30 ns and simulated a power trace of the design during a single 
kP execution. Implementation details, on the scalar k and EC 
point P and the identified vulnerability are elaborated in [9], 
whereas here we primarily highlight the vulnerability and 
concentrate on the implemented countermeasures. 
A comparison of atomic blocks shows that even when 
blocks appear structurally similar, the actual register usage 
and operations differ. In particular, the power shapes of 
regular multiplication and squaring differ due to data-bit and 
address-bit reasons. This difference is short, only 1 clock 
cycle, but significant, and can be exploited for successfully 
revealing the scalar k, which is the secret and target of the 
attack. Fig. 1 illustrates the power profile comparison between 
field multiplication and field squaring operations in the 
design. 
Fig. 1. The distinguishability in the power trace of regular multiplication 
and squaring of finite field elements; includes field multiplication: 
schematic representation 
In the first clock cycle of both operations, the Controller 
addresses the register for the first multiplicand and sends it to 
the 
field 
multiplier 
through 
a 
multiplexer. 
During 
multiplication, the two multiplicands are distinct, requiring 
addressing different registers, thus yielding new values. In the 
second clock cycle of multiplication, a new register is 
accessed, resulting in energy consumption due to activity in 
the multiplexer, which is indicated by the red line in the 

Regular Multiplication trace. In contrast, during field 
squaring, the second multiplicand is the same as the first one, 
keeping both the address and value constant in the second 
clock cycle. This leads to no changes in the multiplexer, 
resulting in no energy usage as indicated by the flat red line in 
the Squaring trace. The multiplexer, a substantial component 
of the kP architecture, significantly impacts overall energy 
consumption, highlighting a distinct power difference 
between squaring and regular multiplication in the second 
clock cycle, attributed to data-bit and address-bit effects. 
To prevent the distinguishability described above, 
designers can employ several strategies. 
One approach is to insert a dummy operation between the 
transfers of the first and second multiplicand. For example, 
the multiplier can obtain a dummy 2nd operand. Alternatively, 
any inactive block of the design can be addressed to obtain a 
dummy operand if the block is not storing an intermediate 
value important for the correct calculation. Moreover, any 
block, for example, the field multiplier, can be instructed to 
write its output to the bus in a seemingly random manner, 
making the sequence unpredictable to attackers. This 
technique requires one additional clock cycle for each 
multiplication or squaring operation. Fig. 2 shows the power 
shapes of the first 3 clock cycles for the design implementing 
this approach. 
Fig. 2. Mitigating multiplication–squaring distinguishability via data-flow 
redirection; includes field multiplication: schematic representation. 
Another approach is dummy register usage, in which the 
first multiplicand is simultaneously stored in a dummy register 
while being transferred to the multiplier. In the case of a 
squaring operation, the second multiplicand is then read from 
this dummy register. Consequently, the registers supplying 
both multiplicands have different addresses, ensuring that the 
multiplexer consumes energy even when providing the same 
value as in the previous cycle, thereby reducing address-based 
leakage (see Fig. 3). In this case, many but not all gates of the 
multiplexer are switching, connecting the output of the 
dummy register to the multiplier, but providing the same value 
as in the previous clock cycle. Please note that the number of 
switched gates depends not only on the hamming distance of 
the addresses of both registers but also on the concrete 
implementation of the multiplexer, i.e., it is the part of the 
design which has to be checked carefully. 
III. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Each proposed solution has distinct advantages and 
limitations. The dummy register method for data flow 
redirection increases design area and costs and slightly raises 
its energy consumption, but does not influence the execution 
time of kP operations. In contrast, the “re-loading” of the bus 
solution, which utilizes randomized dummy addressing, 
requires an extra clock cycle for each instance, thus increasing 
execution time and energy consumption of the design. 
Additionally, field multiplication, squaring and addition 
operations, of different and identical values, can cause the 
same vulnerability, combining address- and data-bit 
phenomena. This aspect has to be investigated. 
Fig. 3. Mitigating multiplication–squaring distinguishability via bus “re-
loading”; includes field multiplication: schematic representation 
A promising strategy that can be used in various ways to 
countermeasure a broad spectrum of physical attacks, 
including localised fault injection attacks, can be flexible, 
dynamically reconfigurable redundancy [10].