Secure Authentication in Wireless IoT: Hamming Code
Assisted SRAM PUF as Device Fingerprint
Florian Lehn1, Pascal Ahr1, and Hans D. Schotten1, 2
1German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
2Division of Wireless Communications and Radio Positioning, RPTU University Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany
Email: {florian.lehn, pascal.ahr, hans.schotten}@dfki.de
Please note: This is a preprint submitted to arXiv, licensed under arXiv.org perpetual, non-exclusive license.
This work is accepted but not yet published at the 30th ITG-Symposium, Mobile Communications - Technologies and Applications
in Osnabrueck, Germany.
Abstract— Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) make use
of intrinsic manufacturing variations in memory cells to derive device-unique responses. Employing such
hardware-rooted fingerprints for authentication, this work demonstrates a threshold-based authentication proof
of concept for constrained Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) devices. The proposed scheme can reliably cap
the the post-authentication bit error rate (BER) below 1 %. Inherent SRAM PUF unreliability is addressed
by a resource-efficient combination of Hamming code (HC) Error Correction (EC) and Temporal Majority
Voting (TMV). Increasing HC redundancy or TMV count significantly reduces the BER, albeit with diminishing
returns and increasingly prohibitive computational overhead. Furthermore, this work quantifies the threshold
gap between strict reliability and security constraints. This gap is reframed as a design budget which enables
the resource-aware calibration of the acceptance threshold, PUF response length, and stabilization technique,
without violating designed-for error limits. Larger responses make reliability optimizations increasingly obsolete.
This comparative analysis establishes a comprehensive design space for PUF EC, guiding future implementations
in balancing EC quality against resource constraints such as computational demand, power consumption, and
implementation complexity.
Index Terms— SRAM PUF, Authentication, Hardware Security, Hamming Code, Error Correction, Majority Voting, Reliability,
IoT, Computational Overhead, Resource Utilization.
1
Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution relies on Big Data and Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT). While Big Data collects, stores, and
processes large volumes of highly diverse data, the IIoT infras-
tructure serves as the primary source generating this data. The
combination of both technologies enables novel insights into in-
dustrial environments. The IIoT is composed of numerous small,
internet-connected sensor nodes. Typically, those devices are
cost-sensitive and highly resource-constrained, characterized by
low computational power and a reliance on low-capacity batteries
or even battery-less operation [1,2]. Due to these constraints,
security remains a critical challenge in IIoT devices. To secure
communications, especially across wireless networks, robust
authentication is essential. Usually handled via conventional
methods such as asymmetric cryptography, these methods can be
compromised or are too resource-intensive for IIoT devices [2,3].
Consequently, Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) have
been demonstrated to be a suitable alternative [3,4].
Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) PUFs derive device-
unique responses R to a startup challenge C, forming a Challenge-
Response Pair (CRP) like a digital fingerprint. This fingerprint
is extracted from intrinsic hardware imperfections caused by
uncontrollable manufacturing variations. A drawback of intrinsic
SRAM PUFs is the imperfect reliability of R. This is caused
by unstable SRAM cells or environmental influences such as
temperature or voltage fluctuations [5].
With two ESP32-S3 microcontrollers communicating via a
Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP) point-to-point connection, this work provides a
proof of concept that the unreliability inherent to PUFs, which
manifests in the bit error rate (BER) of a PUF-based authentica-
tion process, can be addressed by resource-efficient strategies
like basic Hamming code (HC), Majority Voting (MV), and an
authentication acceptance threshold 𝜏BER. Here, different Single
Error Correction (SEC) and Single Error Correction, Double
Error Detection (SECDED) schemes are compared, for which
parity bits are stored as helper data.
Hamming code serves as an Error Correction (EC) scheme
based on XOR logic operations. These bitwise manipulations
are directly performed by the microcontroller’s Arithmetic Logic
Unit (ALU), thus making them both fast and low-power. Con-
sequently, HCs requires significantly lower computational over-
head compared to more complex ECs such as polar codes,
1
arXiv:2604.15810v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

making them highly suitable for low-power Microcontroller
Units (MCUs) [6].
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: First, Section 2
provides an overview of related work. Thereafter, Section 3 de-
tails the design of the SRAM PUF-based authentication testbed.
Section 4 experimentally assesses authentication performance
for various EC and MV configurations and associated 𝜏BER cali-
brations. Finally, Section 5 summarizes findings and highlights
future research directions.
2
Related Work
Authentication, especially in IIoT domains relying on resource-
constrained devices, is one of the main applications of SRAM
PUFs and has been extensively discussed in the literature [1,2,7].
Despite advantages such as retrofit capability, zero additional
hardware overhead, and having low power and cost requirements
while still featuring strong security properties, SRAM PUFs
tend to produce unreliable responses. To address this drawback,
various stabilization concepts have been proposed.
Error-Correcting Codes (ECCs), such as polar codes and
HCs, focus on correcting bit flips of the PUF to provide a
stable response. This post-processing is divided into phases,
including the creation of helper data [6,8]. Additionally, there
are pre-selection and masking schemes to exclusively include
stable bits in the response while discarding unstable ones [9], or
in combination with an ECC, such as HC, to correct unstable
bits [6].
Another approach involves stabilizing the response using MV.
Instead of using the raw base response, there is a post-processing
step that combines a set of responses. Differing in the voting
dimension, there are two schemes: Spatial Majority Voting
(SMV) and Temporal Majority Voting (TMV). SMV, as in [10],
groups adjacent bit responses and selects the binary value inside
the voting window with the highest occurrence or based on a
certain threshold [11]. In contrast, TMV selects the binary value
based on repeated responses for a specific bit location within the
time dimension [12].
However, the landscape of these PUF stabilization techniques
is fragmented, and a standardized combined approach is miss-
ing. Additionally, while these stabilization and EC techniques
improve reliability, they can introduce prohibitive computational
complexity, incur high energy overheads, require substantial
Non-Volatile Storage (NVS) to store helper data, or lead to
significant entropy loss [6, 10, 11]. This introduces compet-
ing design trade-offs, of which there is a lack of comparative
real-world analysis. Furthermore, applying strict authentication
thresholds inherently forces a compromise between security and
usability, creating a direct inverse relationship between the False
Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR) [13],
which necessitates an application-specific calibration to balance
these competing metrics, as well as critical resource limitations
in IIoT devices.
Motivated by these constraints, the main contribution of this
work lies in combining a complexity-aware HC with TMV in
a threshold-based authentication scheme. The objective is to
mitigate the inherent instability of SRAM PUFs for authenti-
cation in IIoT while focusing on resource-efficient solutions.
Specifically, this requires assessing and balancing the associated
computational and memory overheads, and calibrating the au-
thentication threshold in a strictly resource and security-aware
manner. Consequently, this work provides a comprehensive
and comparative design space exploration for low-overhead
PUF-assisted authentication primitives, yielding insights highly
relevant for the application of resource-constrained IIoT devices
in real-world environments.
3
Setup for Evaluation
The employed ESP32-S3 MCUs run FreeRTOS to enable wire-
less communication via the included Wi-Fi stack. To capture
the SRAM startup pattern reliably, the evaluated addresses must
reside in a memory region that is never overwritten by the C
runtime startup sequence. In the ESP-IDF toolchain, the run-
time copies initialised variables from flash and zeroes the .bss
segment before app_main is called. Therefore a PUF array is
placed in the .noinit section using the GCC attribute:
static uint8_t puf_array[CONFIG_PUF_SIZE]
__attribute__((section(".noinit")));
The linker assigns a fixed address to this region, ensuring
that neither the startup code nor the NVS flash subsystem ever
accesses it. This approach is adopted, as it provides the strongest
determinism guarantee. .
The ESP32 family supports deep sleep. This power saving
mode disconnects the main SRAM and the Central Processing
Unit (CPU) from power, only the Real-Time Clock (RTC) SRAM
remains powered for the hardware timers and wakeup logic. RTC
memory makes it possible to store persistent data, like the MV
results. To implement TMV, the ESP32 deep-sleeps between
PUF readings to power-cycle main SRAM and obtain statistically
independent samples. The power-off time can be tailored to
the SRAM properties of the hardware in use via the ESP-IDF
libraries. The MV occurs during system startup at the beginning
of the main task, prior to Wi-Fi and other initializations. This
sequence is necessary because deep sleep powers off the main
CPU and it’s main SRAM, thereby deleting the current execution
Entity
Verifier
ENROLL_REQ
N × (read SRAM, tally, deep sleep) → R
Hamming encode(R) → parity → NVS
ENROLL_RESP (R)
Store reference: R → NVS
ENROLL_ACK
Enrollment
Authentication
AUTH_REQ
N × (read SRAM, tally, deep sleep) → r'
Reconstruct codeword(r', parity ← NVS)
Hamming decode → R'
AUTH_RESP (R')
BER = HD(R', R) / n
ACK (BER ≤ 
)
Figure 1: Sequence diagram of the PUF-based authentication
protocol, illustrating the enrollment and authentication phases.
2

state and resetting the entire system. The majority voted PUF
response is then kept in memory for future authentication requests.
Crucially, the SRAM memory is explicitly zeroed before each
evaluation cycle before deep sleep to mitigate arbitrary SRAM
data remanence effects [14, 15], preventing dependencies on
previous execution states and prior PUF evaluations during
the MV process. This routine guarantees that the pre-power-
down state of the memory is always identical, yielding highly
reproducible PUF responses. For EC, helper data is generated
during enrollment after MV and stored in NVS flash of the
entity to persist across subsequent SRAM power or deep sleep
cycles. Alternatively, if the threat model requires it, EC could
similarly be performed by the verifier. Fig. 1 highlights the
SRAM PUF-assisted authentication protocol as implemented in
software on two ESP32-S3 MCUs.
To clarify the computation overhead of MV and EC, the tech-
niques are implemented as follows: MV acquires 𝑁independent
PUF readings by power-cycling the ESP32 via configurable
deep-sleep intervals. On each boot the raw SRAM PUF re-
sponse is immediately transformed into a per-bit counter stored
in RTC memory, which persists across deep sleep. Each counter
accumulates 𝑁passes of PUF size 𝑛counter increments before
thresholding each counter against 𝑁/2 to produce the final bit
string on the last boot. For EC, only the parity bits are persisted
in NVS as a single packed byte per codeword, loaded as one
contiguous byte array at authentication time. The full Hamming
codeword is then reconstructed on-the-fly by combining the
current raw PUF reading with the stored parity before syndrome-
based SEC or SECDED is applied in a single pass over all
codewords.
4
Results of Evaluation
Data collection was performed on a setup involving, in total, six
ESP32-S3 entity MCUs running at 160 MHz under controlled
conditions in a climate chamber at 21 ◦C and 50 % relative
humidity, configured as highlighted in Fig. 1, with one verifier
connected to one entity via a TCP WLAN connection. The
climate chamber setup is shown in Fig. 2. Based on preliminary
testing the deep sleep time between PUF readings is configured
to 50 ms.
On the verifier, measurements are logged to an
onboard SD card. Each ECC and MV configuration gets its own
separate enrollment and subsequent authentication sweep. Due
to evaluation time restrictions, each sweep is performed for 45
iterations per device, with results aggregated across all entity
devices into the same distribution plots. All PUF responses
are initially extracted at a full length of 2048 bits. To evaluate
smaller PUF sizes 𝑛, these baseline responses are partitioned into
𝑘= 2048/𝑛collected adjacent blocks, proportionally expanding
the available sample pool for shorter response lengths. While
this device and per-config iteration count is sufficient to validate
the ECC and MV design space (see Section 4.1) and calibrate
an error-constrained and resource-aware acceptance threshold
(see Section 4.2), the FAR analysis will rely on an analytical
impostor model rather than empirical inter-device measurements.
Multi-board empirical validation of FARs and other inter-device
security metrics with a larger and diversified chip population
remains future work.
Figure 2: Experimental setup for measurements within a CTS
environmental testing chamber. The composite view includes a
smaller detailed inset photograph, showing four specific ESP32-
S3 circuit boards with labeled connection cables during simulta-
neous testing.
50.0%
52.0%
Uniformity (%)
0
10
20
Count
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
Ideal (50%)
(a) Without MV and EC.
50.0%
52.0%
Uniformity (%)
0
20
40
60
Count
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
Ideal (50%)
(b) With MV (𝑁= 20) and EC.
Figure 3: Uniformity distributions per measured ECC scheme
before (a) and after (b) PUF stabilization techniques.
4.1
Design Space Exploration for Robust PUF
Authentication
The subsequent design space exploration is essentially balancing
three competing pillars: reliability, resource overhead (mem-
ory/CPU/energy), and bit uniformity. This works reliability
optimization strategy hinges on two core principles:
• Helper Data Generation: Here the work discusses the
overhead of storing parity bits for EC, in this case HC.
• Temporal Reliability: Using MV (reading the SRAM 𝑁
times) to filter out unstable bits. This work assesses a
symmetric voting configuration, where the same amount
of votes is applied during enrollment and authentication
(𝑁enroll = 𝑁auth = 𝑁).
For both cases the work also discusses the associated execution
time overhead.
4.1.1
Bit Uniformity
Uniformity, following [16,17], measures the bit bias in a PUF
response as the fractional Hamming-Weight (HW). In an ideal
case this yields a uniform distribution of Unif ≈50%. Fig. 3
highlights that the evaluated SRAM PUF-assisted authentication
approach approximates this ideal. It also demonstrates that
MV and HC EC tighten the distribution, removing some of the
inherent noise.
3

1
5
10
20
Vote conﬁguration
0.0%
2.0%
4.0%
6.0%
BER after ECC (%)
No ECC
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
Auth. threshold 휏= 3%
(a) PUF response size 𝑛= 2048.
1
5
10
20
Vote conﬁguration
0.0%
5.0%
10.0%
15.0%
20.0%
BER after ECC (%)
No ECC
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
Auth. threshold 휏= 3%
(b) PUF response size 𝑛= 64.
Figure 4: Post-correction BER vs. MV count for each EC
scheme for (b) 𝑛= 64 and (a) 𝑛= 2048 bits. Median trends are
connected by lines, with shaded bands indicating the interquartile
range (IQR). Box-and-whisker distributions show the full per-
iteration spread at each vote count, with whiskers extending
to 1.5×interquartile range (IQR). The dashed red line marks a
potential 3 % 𝜏BER authentication threshold.
4.1.2
Reliability
The authentication BER for different EC configurations is pre-
sented in Fig. 4, which indicates the post-correction BER as a
function of MV count 𝑁for all evaluated ECCs. The BER calcu-
lation is based on the normalized Hamming-Distance (HD) [17]
between the enrolled response and the response transmitted for
authentication.
All EC variants exhibit a monotonic BER reduction with
increasing 𝑁, but with diminishing returns, especially beyond
𝑁≈5. SECDED provides a marginal mean improvement over
standard SEC HCs. In a standard SEC-only code, a 2-bit error
produces a nonzero syndrome (the calculated error pattern) that
is indistinguishable from that of a single-bit error at a different
position, which can be seen as a form of syndrome aliasing. This
causes the decoder to miscorrect, flipping an additional bit and
turning two errors into three. The extended parity bit in SECDED
detects this case, suppressing the miscorrection and leaving the
two original errors uncorrected rather than creating a third. By
preventing such 3-bit miscorrections, SECDED eliminates some
of the higher BER outliers seen in standard SEC codes, resulting
in narrower interquartile ranges (IQRs) in Fig. 4. Consequently,
the mitigated syndrome aliasing phenomenon can be observed
in the reduced dispersion of the SECDED box plots. In addition,
for smaller PUF response sizes 𝑛, fewer codewords per response
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Code rate (%)
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
ECC variant
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Parity bits added
0 b
1536 b
2048 b
1024 b
1280 b
640 b
768 b
Parity bits added
Code rate (%)
Figure 5: Trade-off between NVS overhead and data efficiency
for each HC variant for a 256-byte PUF response, where the
code rate 𝑅= 𝑛/𝑘relates data bits 𝑛to codeword bits 𝑘.
are formed, so a single miscorrected block has a disproportionate
impact on the overall BER, amplifying the outlier effect due to
miscorrections, which is visible in Fig. 4 when comparing (b)
𝑛= 64 and (a) 𝑛= 2048 bits. Therefore, as demonstrated in
Fig. 4b, for small 𝑛, the whiskers and outliers of the HC-corrected
BER distributions, especially those that are SEC-only with low
redundancy such as H(21,16) or H(12,8), can exceed those of the
uncorrected baseline, confirming that miscorrection can degrade
worst-case reliability beyond the no-ECC case when only few
codewords average out the effect. Nevertheless, the mean BER
across all MV and EC configurations (the diamond markers in
Fig. 4), stays the same when comparing lower 𝑛(4b) and higher
𝑛(4a), only the statistical spread is altered.
Additionally, as expected, the BER improves as the number of
HC data bits, so the code rate, decreases, with H(7, 4) configu-
rations outperforming H(12, 8) and H(21, 16) variants. Taking
into account fewer data bits per HC correction block reduces
the potential for > 1 bit (SEC) or > 2 bit (SECDED) uncor-
rectable and undetectable bit flips and thereby false miscorrection
attempts within a single codeword.
4.1.3
Reliability vs. Memory Overhead
Designers must evaluate whether the suppression of error alias-
ing and the resulting reliability gains justify the increased helper
data storage overhead of the additional SECDED parity bit. In
addition, the performance gain of fewer data bits per codeword
comes at the cost of increased helper data overhead. Fig. 5
illustrates this EC memory overhead, with a higher code rate
implying higher data efficiency but also worse reliability (see
Fig. 4). Smaller correction blocks like H(7,4) impose a signif-
icantly lower data-to-parity ratio, forcing a trade-off between
maximizing HC EC quality and minimizing the parity overhead.
This reliability vs. memory overhead trade-off is is especially
relevant for HC implementations on resource-constrained de-
vices like the ESP32 family with limited NVS flash for helper
data storage. Furthermore, the public transmission and storage
of helper data introduce severe security vulnerabilities, as they
can inadvertently leak information about the underlying secret
key [8] or be exploited by machine learning models to predict
PUF responses [3], imposing strict constraints on the assumed
threat model. Future real-world deployments must mitigate these
advanced attack vectors, but such techniques remain beyond the
scope of this work and readers are referred to related work [3,8].
4

4.1.4
Computational Demand
The computational demand and execution time overhead is
crucial in selecting the appropriate PUF stabilization technique.
This demand can be characterized via the execution time overhead
and is generally directly proportional to the energy demand of
the operation. This discounts some differences in the power
demand of different architectural operations. Data locality, for
example, is important. Moving data by accessing memory often
has a higher power demand than local arithmetic operations.
Increasing the MV count has a high impact as it does not just
increase CPU time, but also increases the number of energy-
demanding SRAM read cycles. In this TMV implementation
specifically, it also creates repeated boot cycles per count. These
repeated reads and especially boot cycles are expected to be the
primary energy driver. Similarly, choosing a HC with a higher
memory overhead leads to increased energy-intensive NVS flash
transitions to retrieve stored helper data. Nevertheless, without
conducting detailed energy demand measurements, this work
takes on the more focused approach of quantifying the general
computational overhead via execution time measurements.
Fig. 6 highlights the execution time trade-offs between dif-
ferent EC codes and MV vote counts. While decreasing the
code rate has little effect on pure computation time, the resulting
parity overhead significantly increases NVS read cycles and
associated execution times, making these factors, alongside
security implications [3,8] and correction quality, the primary
drivers in selecting the appropriate HC variant. With increasing
𝑁, MV exhibits a significant BER improvement (see Fig. 4)
but also the most prohibitive impact on the execution time (see
Fig. 6b), especially due to the boot overhead which does not
even capture the full reboot cost, because only the ESP-IDF
software timer is used for measurement, and it is initialised only
after the first-stage bootloader and the second-stage firmware
loader from flash have already completed. Additionally, the
power-off sleep times are excluded, which carry considerable
latency but negligible energy overhead due to the low deep-sleep
current draw. Therefore, considering the diminishing returns in
increasing 𝑁(see Fig. 4) but increasingly prohibitive overhead
(see Fig. 6b), selecting the right combination of MV count 𝑁
and HC code rate is paramount in meeting resource constraints
and PUF reliability requirements simultaneously. Consequently,
for a given reliability requirement, the MV count 𝑁and HC
code rate should be selected as small as possible.
4.2
Resource-Aware Threshold Calibration for
Authentication
This section is about meeting real-world constraints via the
selection of a device-specific authentication threshold 𝜏BER that
balances FAR and FRR while simultaneously quantifying the
available design budget for resource optimizations for a fixed
EC and MV setting. The FAR and FRR represent the core
security-usability trade-off in threshold-based authentication
systems [18]. In HD-based threshold systems, as the FAR is
lowered (increasing security) by decreasing the threshold, the
FRR increases (reducing user convenience), creating a direct
inverse relationship [13]. Consequently, for every EC config-
uration the FAR and FRR are assessed in Fig. 7 based on the
real-world genuine authentication measurement results (FRR)
and an analytical impostor PUF response (FAR) distribution for
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
ECC variant
0 휇s
1,000 휇s
2,000 휇s
3,000 휇s
4,000 휇s
ECC total overhead (휇s)
(a) Boxplot distribution of HC EC execution time for each code variant
without MV. Variance reflects the number of bit errors requiring
correction, which differs between iterations due to SRAM noise. EC
execution is composed of EC computation time (syndrome computation
and error correction) and memory overhead, mainly NVS transactions
to retrieve helper data.
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
ECC variant
0 ms
200 ms
400 ms
600 ms
Incl. boot overhead (ms)
0 ms
5 ms
10 ms
Excl. boot overhead (ms)
Mean computation time
SRAM read
Boot overhead
Majority vote
ECC computation
ECC memory overhead
(b) Mean on-device computation time per EC variant for a MV con-
figuration of 𝑁= 10. Times are decomposed into SRAM readout
(blue, negligible), MV computation (orange), and EC computation (red)
and memory access overhead (grey). From the boot overhead (green)
deep-sleep discharge intervals are excluded.
Figure 6: PUF authentication timing breakdown. (a) shows
the HC EC time distribution per variant. (b) shows that MV
dominates computation time, with EC correction contributing a
comparatively small, slightly variant-dependent overhead.
varying 𝜏BER acceptance thresholds.
The plots in Fig. 7 highlight these two different types of
errors, which move in opposite directions. The y-axis represents
the probability of a legitimate user being rejected (FRR) or
an impostor being accepted (FAR). Fig. 7 presents the results
based on sweeping through 𝜏BER from an extremely strict to
an extremely lenient authentication acceptance threshold. In
this analysis, the impostor PUF response and the associated
BER distribution after authentication are modeled analytically
for a 𝑛-bit SRAM PUF response.
Assuming ideal cell-to-
cell independence and a uniform bit probability 𝑝= 0.5, the
number of bit-flips between two independent responses follows
a Binomial distribution 𝑋∼𝐵(𝑛, 𝑝). As the bit length 𝑛of
the PUF response increases, the spread (𝜎) of the binomial
distribution for the impostor narrows significantly relative to the
mean and vice versa. Fig. 7 visually highlights this, because if a
high enough PUF response bit-length (e.g., 𝑛= 2048 in Fig. 7a)
is selected, the analytical impostor distribution exhibits extreme
concentration around the mean. Consequently, this shows as a
wide margin of separation between the genuine empirical FRR
and the theoretical FAR curves in Fig. 7. To visually demonstrate
how bias effects shift the impostor distribution, models with slight
5

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
BER threshold 휏(%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Error rate
SMec = 39.4%
SMec = 42.5%
SMec = 42.8%
SMec = 42.0%
SMec = 42.2%
SMec = 41.1%
SMec = 41.4%
bias ≤20%
bias ≤10%
bias ≤5%
FAR (unbiased)
휏max = 43.4% (FAR ≤1e-09)
FRR — No ECC
휏min No ECC = 4.0% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(7,4)
휏min H(7,4) = 0.9% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(8,4)
휏min H(8,4) = 0.6% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(12,8)
휏min H(12,8) = 1.3% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(13,8)
휏min H(13,8) = 1.2% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(21,16)
휏min H(21,16) = 2.3% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(22,16)
휏min H(22,16) = 2.0% (FRR≤1%)
(a) FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis for 𝑛= 2048.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
BER threshold 휏(%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
Error rate
SMec = 1.6%
SMec = 4.7%
SMec = 7.8%
SMec = 1.6%
SMec = 3.1%
SMec = 0.0%
SMec = 0.0%
bias ≤20%
bias ≤10%
bias ≤5%
FAR (unbiased)
휏max = 14.1% (FAR ≤1e-09)
FRR — No ECC
휏min No ECC = 12.5% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(7,4)
휏min H(7,4) = 9.4% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(8,4)
휏min H(8,4) = 6.2% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(12,8)
휏min H(12,8) = 12.5% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(13,8)
휏min H(13,8) = 10.9% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(21,16)
휏min H(21,16) = 14.1% (FRR≤1%)
FRR — H(22,16)
휏min H(22,16) = 14.1% (FRR≤1%)
(b) FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis for 𝑛= 64.
Figure 7: FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis
without MV. The graphs (a) (𝑛= 2048) and (b) (𝑛= 64)
illustrate the trade-off between security (preventing unauthorized
access, FAR) and reliability (ensuring legitimate access, FRR)
as the acceptance threshold 𝜏BER is varied. SMec analysis is
based on 𝛼FAR = 10−9 and 𝛼FRR = 0.01.
bit biases 𝑝≠0.5 are also included in the analysis in Fig. 7. Once
the threshold grows beyond the mean almost every theoretical
impostor PUF response from the binomial model is considered
authentic because random chance satisfies that requirement.
This analytical model is essentially the same concept as in [13].
In contrast, they introduce their analytical models using pre-
measured mean reliability and uniqueness of their SRAM PUF.
SRAM PUFs sufficiently approximate this binomial model [13],
as also highlighted in the previous uniformity results (see Fig. 3)
and in the other close-to-ideal SRAM PUF qualities observed in
related work [5,19]. In Fig. 7, this work employs this analytical
binomial model only for the FAR analysis (the ideal impostor)
but uses actual empirical measurement curves for the FRR (the
legitimate user). The analytical model just serves as a reference
for ideal randomness and uniformity, against which the measured
genuine noise distributions of the authentication iterations are
compared.
We consider this approach as sufficient, as the
focus of this work is not empirical inter-device FAR security
testing, but the resource-reliability trade-off. Here, the binomial
impostor model provides a clean, reproducible FAR security
baseline that isolates the variable this work cares about: how
EC and MV configurations shift the FRR curve relative to a
fixed theoretical FAR reference bound. Nevertheless, future
analyses with different requirements may employ more complex
mathematical models. These models could abandon ideal intra-
and inter-device independence assumptions to account for real-
world hardware realities, such as stuck bits, non-uniform cell
probabilities, and spatial correlations between chips.
Visually, in Fig. 7, the ideal operating window where the
threshold should be placed is the flat gap between the FRR lines
hitting zero and the FAR line starting to rise. Within this gap,
both the FRR and FAR are effectively zero, so the probabilities of
an authentic node getting locked out or a malicious impostor node
getting authenticated illegally are below a negligible threshold.
However, these security guarantees warrant a formal definition.
This work aims to define the operating window for threshold
selection using strict FAR and FRR error constraints based on
the observed empirical FRR and analytical FAR values. Let
𝛼FRR be the maximum acceptable FRR, and let 𝛼FAR be the
maximum acceptable FAR. This work defines a lower bound
threshold, 𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛, that satisfies the reliability constraint:
FRR(𝜏min) ≤𝛼FRR
Similarly, an upper bound threshold 𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥satisfies the security
constraint against an impostor being accepted:
FAR(𝜏max) ≤𝛼FAR
Under the assumption of ideal bit independence and uniformity
of the modeled impostor response, the probability of a false
acceptance for a threshold placed anywhere in this operating
range is strictly bounded by the designed-for error limit 𝛼FAR.
By establishing strict upper limits for acceptable error rates
𝛼FAR and 𝛼FRR, the boundary thresholds 𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛and 𝜏𝑚𝑎𝑥that
satisfy these constraints can then be numerically determined.
In this analysis, 𝛼FRR is conservatively set to 𝛼FRR = 0.01, as
the limited sample count of the genuine BER measurements is
insufficient to reliably observe the rare outliers needed to define
a stricter threshold.
An error-constrained security margin (SMec) to quantify this
operating window is then formally defined as the difference
between these two bounded thresholds, representing the robust
tolerance zone available for threshold calibration:
SMec = 𝜏max −𝜏min
(1)
If 𝜏min > 𝜏max, it indicates that the genuine PUF noise exceeds
the maximum threshold permissible to block impostors. In this
scenario, the system is fundamentally broken, as no threshold
can satisfy both 𝛼FRR and 𝛼FAR simultaneously. Therefore, a
valid operating window strictly requires SMec > 0. If SMec ≤0,
the magnitude of the negative margin quantifies the severity of
the distribution overlap and serves as a diagnostic metric for
failed PUF-assisted authentication primitives. When a valid
margin exists, this work recommends selecting the acceptance
threshold at the reliability boundary: 𝜏BER = 𝜏min. A potential
violation of 𝛼FRR is less severe, as it degrades user convenience
but does not compromise the system’s security guarantees. If
enough CRPs are available, the legitimately rejected entity can
reinitiate the authentication process with a fresh challenge from
the verifier. In addition, setting the threshold as strictly as
possible maximizes the distance to 𝜏max, thereby converting the
entire SMec into a margin of safety against false acceptances.
Crucially, this work reframes SMec not just as a safety buffer,
but as a quantifiable design budget. Fig. 7 highlights SMec
for 𝛼FAR = 10−9 and 𝛼FRR = 0.01. Depending on the ideal
qualities of the PUF and these error thresholds, a highly robust
configuration (e.g., 𝑛= 2048 with strong HC EC, see Fig.7a)
can yield a massively wide SMec, indicating that the system
is over-provisioned for the required 𝛼constraints. This excess
margin reveals the potential headroom available for resource op-
timization. By actively optimizing the security margin, trading
6

away excess SMec by reducing the PUF response length 𝑛or
utilizing less computationally demanding EC and MV schemes,
designers can potentially significantly lower computational and
energy overheads, or consequently opt for weaker hardware,
while still strictly satisfying the designed-for security thresholds.
If SMec = 0, there is exactly one theoretical threshold that
mathematically satisfies the constraints, but under real-world
conditions a margin of zero means that environmental fluctu-
ations, such as temperature changes, could break the security
guarantees. Therefore, a practical operating window only exists
when SMec > 0 whilst embedding some additional margin of
safety.
Consequently, the engineering goal is to scale down the
resource utilization until a target SMtarget
ec
is achieved, leaving
only a small, deliberate safety buffer above zero to account
for real-world environmental fluctuations that might otherwise
break the security guarantees. A future algorithm to optimize
the resource efficiency of the authentication scheme would solve
for SMtarget
ec
by locking acceptable error rates in place. This
approach would mathematically optimize EC, MV, and PUF
response length using the empirically determined correlations,
actively altering the algorithmic parameters until the system
perfectly fits the security requirements with minimal resource
overhead (i.e., SMec →SMtarget
ec
≈0).
For now, the evaluations of the subsequent Sections offer a
comparative summary of SMec for various configurations of the
implemented authentication system for specific security targets
𝛼FAR. To start, Fig. 8 illustrates how SMec scales with PUF size
𝑛across all evaluated configurations at 𝛼FAR = 10−6.
4.2.1
Relative Impact of MV, 𝑛, and HC EC
All EC and MV configurations exhibit an increasingly robust
security margin SMec with increasing 𝑛, 𝑁or decreasing HC
code rate. The magnitude of each parameter’s contribution differs
substantially: At 𝛼FAR = 10−6 scaling 𝑛from 64 to 2048 bits
improves SMec by approximately 28 %, whereas maximising 𝑁
(from 1 to 20 votes) or switching to the most redundant ECC
variant each add only ≈6 % at 𝑛= 256 bits. This asymmetry
arises because just by increasing 𝑛the impostor BER distribution
becomes more concentrated, and the genuine empirical BER
distribution becomes tighter, shifting both 𝜏max and 𝜏min so that
they separate more from each other and the SMec improves,
whereas 𝑁and HC EC affect 𝜏min alone. Consequently, for a
high 𝑛, the results show, that the law of large numbers works in an
engineer’s favor to create a nearly impassable statistical barrier for
authentication, even for relatively lenient acceptance thresholds.
Nevertheless, Fig. 8 highlights that increasing 𝑛similarly to
increasing 𝑁or decreasing the HC code rate at some point
yields diminishing returns in increasing SMec. Consequently,
the combined use of all three might be necessary in practice
for very strict error thresholds or when a small 𝑛is dictated by
resource restrictions.
4.2.2
Impact of Tightened Security Constraints
Fig. 9 plots the shift in the error-constrained security margin
ΔSMec across PUF size 𝑛as the 𝛼FAR requirement is tightened.
Trivially, stricter security guarantees also reduce SMec leaving
less potential for resource optimizations. Fig. 9 highlights that
making 𝛼FAR stricter (e.g., 10−6 →10−9) has a greater effect
16
128
1024
PUF size (bits)
0
20
40
휏BER (%)
휏min
휏max
(a) H(7,4), 𝑁= 1, 𝛼FAR = 10−6.
16
128
1024
PUF size (bits)
0
20
40
휏BER (%)
휏min
휏max
(b) H(7,4), 𝑁= 20, 𝛼FAR = 10−6.
4
8
16
32 48 64
128
256
512
1024
2048
PUF size (bits)
−40
−20
0
20
40
SMec (%)
ECC
No ECC
H(7,4)
H(8,4)
H(12,8)
H(13,8)
H(21,16)
H(22,16)
Vote count
N = 1
N = 5
N = 10
N = 20
훼FAR zones
10−6: 5–10% zone
10−9: 5–10% zone
10−12: 5–10% zone
(c) SMec scaling across all configurations vs. PUF size 𝑛.
16
32
48
64
128
256
PUF size (bits)
0
10
20
SMec (%)
(d) SMec scaling zoomed in across all configurations vs. PUF size 𝑛.
Figure 8: Evolution of the error-constrained security margin
(SMec) at 𝛼FAR = 10−6. (a) and (b) show SMec bounded by 𝜏min
and 𝜏max for an exemplary configuration. Green denotes valid
operating windows (SMec > 0) and red marks unviable configu-
rations. (c) maps SMec scaling versus 𝑛, isolating configurations
above a safe limit SMmin
ec
= 5 % where excess resource overhead
is constrained by an acceptable upper bound in 5–10% target
𝛼FAR zones. (d) provides a closer view.
on SMec at smaller values of 𝑛. For example, for 2048-bit
measurements, the choice between 𝛼FAR = 10−6 and 𝛼FAR =
10−9 makes little difference (≈1.4%).
However, for 64 to
128 bit responses, the difference is significant. The oscillations
are a quantisation artefact: as 𝑛grows, the integer number of
bits separating the two acceptance thresholds can only change
in unit steps, so ΔSMec falls gradually between consecutive
steps and rises sharply at each forward step, tracing a sawtooth
whose amplitude envelope decays as 1/√𝑛. At 𝑛≤16, the
Binomial impostor distribution has so few discrete outcomes
that 𝜏max floors at 0 % under all 𝛼FAR targets, making ΔSMec
identically zero. The PUF response is too short for the FAR
constraint to differentiate between the security levels. When
𝛼FAR is made stricter 𝜏max shifts, and the SMec is reduced by a
fixed amount at a given 𝑛. Because an ideal binomial impostor
source is used ΔSMec can also be analytically determined. When
𝛼FRR is tightened, the resulting ΔSMec values are inherently less
7

4
8
16
32 48 64
128
256
512
1024
2048
PUF size 푛(bits)
−10
0
ΔSMec (%)
strict 훼FAR (relaxed: 10−6)
10−7 (+1 dec.)
10−8 (+2 dec.)
10−9 (+3 dec.)
10−10 (+4 dec.)
10−11 (+5 dec.)
10−12 (+6 dec.)
Figure 9: Change in ΔSMec when tightening 𝛼FAR from 10−6,
as a function of PUF size 𝑛for an ideal impostor with no bias.
4
8
16
32 48 64
128
256
512
1024
2048
PUF size 푛(bits)
−5
0
ΔSMec (%)
Cell bias (훼FAR = 10−6)
bias = 0.05
bias = 0.10
bias = 0.20
Figure 10: Change in ΔSMec for non-ideal bit bias.
predictable than in the 𝛼FAR case, as in this work, 𝜏min is derived
from empirical genuine BER measurements with finite sample
counts rather than a closed-form model. Nevertheless, assuming
the genuine BER also follows a binomial distribution as shown
in [13], ΔSMec behaves analogously for Δ𝛼FRR and Δ𝛼FAR, so
the analysis presented for the FAR extends qualitatively to the
FRR.
4.2.3
PUF Bias Effects on Threshold Calibration
Fig. 10 shows that SMec is highly dependent on the ideal qualities
of the PUF response, as SMec degrades with increased bit bias
in the binomial impostor model. The sawtooth pattern arises
due to similar reasons as in 4.2.2.
4.2.4
Imperfect PUF Uniqueness
Similarly to 4.2.3, imperfect PUF uniqueness caused by inter-
chip correlation reduces SMec. The impostor inter-chip HD
is binomially modeled, where the baseline per-bit mismatch
probability is proportionally reduced by a positive inter-chip cor-
relation factor 𝜌chip ∈[0, 1). Because correlated chips generate
inherently more similar responses, the theoretical impostor HD
distribution shifts closer to the genuine authentication distribu-
tion. Consequently, to mathematically maintain a strict target
(𝛼FAR), the maximum permissible impostor threshold 𝜏max must
be lowered. Fig. 11 illustrates this correlation-induced shift
ΔSMec, plotting the difference between an uncorrelated and a
correlated baseline. As expected, it shows, a larger correlation
factor 𝜌chip necessitates a stricter threshold, yielding a larger loss
in SMec. The characteristic sawtooth behavior again arises from
the discrete nature of the binomial quantile at finite PUF sizes 𝑛.
4.2.5
Excluding Overprovisioned Configurations
Out of all tested configurations in Fig. 8, for a given reliability
constraint (𝛼FRR = 0.01) and security constraint (e.g., 𝛼FAR =
10−6), the configurations within the shaded target bands are
deemed most appropriate, as resource overhead is strictly capped
to prevent overprovisioning. These bands isolate an operational
window where the security margin is bounded strictly between a
4
8
16
32
48 64
128
256
512
1024
2048
PUF size 푛(bits)
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
ΔSMec (%)
Inter-chip correlation (훼FAR = 10−6)
휌chip = 1 %
휌chip = 2 %
휌chip = 3 %
휌chip = 10 %
Figure 11: Impact of inter-chip correlation 𝜌chip on SMec.
necessary safety floor (SMmin
ec
≥0) against unaccounted for PUF
noise and inter-chip dependencies, and an acceptable overhead
ceiling SMceil
ec . Configurations within this zone safely satisfy
all error constraints while exhibiting little wasteful headroom
for further resource optimization. Although visualized here
as a broader selection band (SMmin
ec
≤SMtarget
ec
≤SMceil
ec ) to
illustrate the available design space, a practical deployment
would aggressively optimize resources by collapsing this target
directly to the safety floor (SMtarget
ec
= SMmin
ec ).
To account for non-ideal PUF behavior that was not empiri-
cally assessed in this work, for instance, correlations between
chips (see 4.2.4), a fixed safety offset of SMmin
ec
= 5 % is applied.
This is assumed to be sufficient, due to the close-to-ideal unifor-
mity results of the implemented SRAM PUF (see Fig. 3) and
predictably good SRAM PUF uniqueness and randomness as
shown in related work [5,13,19]. But this safety offset has to be
individually assessed based on the PUF.
Statistically, 𝜏max remains zero at small 𝑛until 𝛼FAR > 0.5𝑛
(approximately 𝑛≳20 for 𝛼FAR = 10−6 and 𝑛≳30 for 𝛼FAR =
10−9), marking the theoretical threshold beyond which a strictly
positive security margin (SMec > 0) becomes possible. At small
𝑛close to this bound, a counter-intuitive non-monotonic SMec
inversion can be observed in Fig. 8 for some of the HC EC and
MV configurations. This effect is due to evaluating a statistical
quantile (𝜏min derived from 𝛼FRR) against an asymmetric, multi-
modal distribution of genuine post-authentication BER, caused
by rare clustered errors that increasingly start to fragment the
distribution at smaller 𝑛. Decreasing 𝑛increasingly isolates
clustered erroneous bits into a shrinking fraction of rare worst-
case outlier responses, leaving a proportionally larger pool of
perfect, error-free ones. This creates competing effects: while
the increased dispersion of the BER distribution at lower 𝑛
(see Fig. 4) initially drives 𝜏min up, the growing sample pool of
perfect responses causes the percentile thresholding at the 𝛼FRR
boundary to increasingly mask the rare outliers in some cases. In
these cases, once this masking effect overpowers the increasing
dispersion, the 𝜏min threshold counter-intuitively stops increasing
or is even pulled back towards zero. This statistical effect can be
amplified by HC miscorrections because these induce additional
errors in a codeword, making the effect less noticeable in the
no-ECC case. If errors were truly randomly scattered across
bits, smaller 𝑛would always yield a wider non-fragmented BER
distribution. The 99th percentile (𝜏𝑚𝑖𝑛for 𝛼FRR = 0.01) would
then always decrease monotonically as 𝑛grows.
Consequently, once the growing fragmentation of the per-
response BER distribution starts to have a stronger impact on
the 𝜏min computation with decreasing 𝑛, this effect increasingly
degrades the validity of SMec. Therefore, SMec is only a reliable
indicator of a resource-aware and error-constrained operating
window available for threshold calibration above a lower bound
𝑛min. Based on a visual inspection of Fig. 8, rather than a
8

formal empirical assessment, this bound 𝑛min appears to lie at
approximately 𝑛≳64 for 𝛼FAR = 10−6, beyond which this
effect ceases to have a noticeable impact. Since 𝑛min strongly
depends on the magnitude of PUF error clustering and the
nature of the BER distribution at small 𝑛it is in need to be
individually assessed. Therefore, only configurations in Fig. 8
that exceed 𝑛≳𝑛min and fall within a specific 𝛼FAR target zone
are considered candidates for a resource-aware 𝜏BER calibration.
Below this threshold, this work advises against relying on SMec,
as the metric becomes severely distorted by the exact shape of
the distribution, a characteristic assumed to be highly device-
specific and therefore unreliable when used to assess whether
a SRAM PUF-assisted authentication schemes reliably meets
certain 𝛼FAR and 𝛼FRR targets.
For a shift in the security constraint 𝛼FAR the offsets ΔSMec
in Fig. 9 would need to be applied to the SMec curves in Fig. 8.
Instead, each additional 𝛼FAR target zone in Fig. 8 is reconstructed
analytically by shifting the baseline band by the 𝜏max difference
between baseline and target constraints, without re-plotting the
empirical SMec lines. For configurations within these target
zones, the trade-offs among 𝑛, 𝑁, and the HC EC variant, such
as the computational overhead discussed in Section 4.1, now
dictate the final selection.
4.2.6
Implications of the Results
The target zones in Fig. 8 indicate, designers can opt for a
larger PUF response 𝑛and relax the acceptance threshold in-
stead of resorting to implementing complex and computationally
demanding HC EC or MV schemes, whilst meeting the same
security guarantees at a designed-for SMtarget
ec
. Only shorter PUF
responses thus necessitate stronger MV and HC EC. Crucially,
as Fig. 8 shows, HC EC can even worsen the security margin
compared to the baseline at smaller 𝑛< 128. Only after 𝑛> 128
this apparent performance inversion is reliably reverted and Fig.8
shows the expected pattern of HCs with lower codes rates always
outperforming higher code rates. This is in contrast to the aver-
age BER which reliably improves with the code rate independent
of 𝑛(see Fig.4). With fewer HC codewords per PUF response,
due to smaller 𝑛, a single miscorrected block or other clustered
errors disproportionately affect the per-response BER, creating
worse outliers than without EC (see also Fig. 4), which can lead
to a significant fragmentation of the BER distribution. For larger
PUF sizes, the correctly decoded blocks, where single-bit errors
are eliminated, increasingly outweigh the rare miscorrections,
and the net effect of EC becomes reliably positive. Again due
to the percentile thresholding computation explained in Sec-
tion 4.2.5, this results in no-ECC actually reliably outperforming
some HC variants in meeting SMtarget
ec
at smaller 𝑛(for exam-
ple, see H(21,16) in Fig 8 at 𝑛= 64). Consequently, at small
values of 𝑛, HC configurations with efficient code rates (e.g.,
H(21,16) or H(22,16)) are often unviable. This makes it difficult
to justify HC deployment over increasing 𝑛, which naturally
improves the security margin and renders such PUF stabilization
techniques increasingly obsolete. For MV, the main drawback
remains the computational overhead discussed in Section 4.1.
This makes small 𝑛only attractive in edge cases, when a large
𝑛is prohibitively expensive, due to an increasingly large CRP
database, NVS limitations, wireless transmission overheads, or
other constraints. Here, the results highlight that the system
can be made significantly stricter without degrading usability
through one of three approaches: moderate MV (𝑁≲5) com-
bined with low-redundancy HCs, low code rate HC EC alone, or
aggressive MV (𝑁≳5). Consequently, only for a small 𝑛, select-
ing the appropriate reliability optimization in threshold-based
PUF-assisted authentication remains an application and device-
specific challenge. To this end, this implementation presented a
representative assortment of resource-aware solutions. However,
designers must also balance the quality of the selected reliability
enhancement against the mentioned security implications of
increased helper data storage [3,8] and the computational and
memory overheads discussed in Section 4.1. Combined, these
diverse factors introduce a multitude of competing dimensions
in this design space exploration that engineers must consider
when deciding on an authentication configuration. Consequently,
to satisfy the strict resource constraints of IIoT devices, this
work recommends a balanced authentication approach. Here,
the authors assume the perfect trade-off to be highly device
and application-unique and in need to be individually assessed.
Specifically, whenever a large 𝑛is feasible, to meet security guar-
antees in a resource-efficient way (i.e., SMec →SMtarget
ec
≈0)
it is preferred to opt for a more lenient acceptance threshold at
such larger 𝑛, and when necessary, pair it with a lightweight HC
SECDED, rather than high MV counts.
5
Conclusion and Outlook
This work presented a highly secure threshold-based SRAM PUF-
assisted authentication scheme tailored for resource-constrained
IIoT environments. To this end, it formally defined an error-
constrained security margin (SMec) to quantify the operating
window available for threshold calibration between the strict
boundaries of acceptable false acceptance (FAR) and rejection
rates (FRR). This novel metric was systematically utilized as a
measurable design budget, highlighting the potential to safely
scale down computational overhead without violating predefined
security and reliability guarantees. It depends heavily on ideal
SRAM PUF qualities, and larger responses (𝑛) permit signifi-
cantly more lenient acceptance thresholds, rendering reliability
optimizations increasingly obsolete.
The evaluation demonstrated the viability of using MV paired
with low-overhead HCs to effectively maintain FRR compli-
ance under strict thresholds, particularly when resource limits
mandate shorter PUF responses. All evaluated EC variants
exhibited a monotonic mean per-response post-authentication
BER reduction with increasing MV count and decreasing HC
EC code rate. More redundant and computationally expensive
combined configurations reliably cap the mean BER below
1%, with both strategies yielding diminishing returns, but in-
creasingly prohibitive overheads. SECDED HCs exhibit only
marginally better mean BER, but the results show that increased
SEC miscorrection-induced outliers, manifesting in an increased
fragmentation of the genuine BER distribution, can actually
significantly worsen the SMec at smaller 𝑛even when compared
to the base case. This suggests SECDED deployment is preferred
at small 𝑛, even though it must be carefully evaluated against the
additional parity overhead on a per-application basis.
Combined, these results facilitate a robust design space explo-
ration of various SRAM PUF-assisted authentication configura-
tions, guiding future implementations in trading off excess SMec
against processing time, energy requirements, and implementa-
9

tion overhead. Here, as a first step in this direction, this work
clearly demonstrated EC quality and computational overheads
of MV and HCs.
Future work could expand upon this by incorporating detailed
power and energy profiling, multi-board empirical FAR testing
and more complex mathematical impostor models.