Adaptive Instruction Composition for Automated LLM Red-Teaming
Jesse Zymet, Andy Luo, Swapnil Shinde, Sahil Wadhwa, Emily Chen
Capital One, AI Foundations
{jesse.zymet, andy.luo, swapnil.shinde2, sahil.wadhwa, emily.chen2}
@capitalone.com
Abstract
Many approaches to LLM red-teaming leverage
an attacker LLM to discover jailbreaks against
a target. Several of them task the attacker with
identifying effective strategies through trial
and error, resulting in a semantically limited
range of successes. Another approach discov-
ers diverse attacks by combining crowdsourced
harmful queries and tactics into instructions for
the attacker, but does so at random, limiting
effectiveness. This article introduces a novel
framework, ADAPTIVE INSTRUCTION COM-
POSITION, that combines crowdsourced texts
according to an adaptive mechanism trained
to jointly optimize effectiveness with diversity.
We use reinforcement learning to balance ex-
ploration with exploitation in a combinatorial
space of instructions to guide the attacker to-
ward diverse generations tailored to target vul-
nerabilities. We demonstrate that our approach
substantially outperforms random combination
on a set of effectiveness and diversity met-
rics, even under model transfer. Further, we
show that it surpasses a host of recent adap-
tive approaches on Harmbench. We employ a
lightweight neural contextual bandit that adapts
to contrastive embedding inputs, and provide
ablations suggesting that the contrastive pre-
training enables the network to rapidly general-
ize and scale to the massive space as it learns.
Warning: this article discusses malicious con-
tent and methods for generating it using LLMs.
1
Introduction
Though LLMs have become indispensable tools
across several industries, they may fall victim to
a variety of different attacks that compromise the
safety of their users. One commonly studied vari-
ety of attack is the jailbreak, consisting of a harm-
ful request formulated to bypass the LLM’s safety
protocols using some tactic and solicit from it mis-
informed, biased, toxic, or sensitive content (Zou
et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024c; Deng et al., 2024; Xu
Figure 1: Overview of Adaptive Instruction Composition
et al., 2024). For example, though in a prior investi-
gation GPT-4 refused to answer an array of harmful
requests, it engaged with these requests once they
were translated into a low-resource language (Yong
et al., 2024). Much research into LLM safety fo-
cuses on developing robust defenses against attacks
using finetuned models (Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai
et al., 2022; Korbak et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2024),
but training them would require that an expansive
training set of attacks be accumulated. Investiga-
tors have therefore turned to the practice of LLM
red-teaming, in which a target LLM is attacked
in order to identify its idiosyncratic vulnerabilities
proactively. Attacks may then be leveraged within
safety training to improve defenses.
Though manual attacking is commonly em-
ployed to this end (Ganguli et al., 2022), recent
proposals develop automated approaches to red-
teaming against a black-box target LLM (see Perez
et al. (2022); Ganguli et al. (2022); Chao et al.
(2024); Mehrotra et al. (2023); Shen et al. (2024);
Liu et al. (2024b,a), among others). The objec-
tive of automated red-teaming is multipartite: the
system must discover successful attacks at a high
rate, and the attacks it discovers must be semanti-
cally diverse (Perez et al., 2022). Many proposals
arXiv:2604.21159v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

share a common framework in which an attacker
LLM is tasked with generating a set of successful
attacks against a given target LLM in a series of
interactions whose content is assessed for safety
by an evaluator. An instruction is served to the
attacker requiring, for example, that it generate a
harmful query; further, the attacker must role-play
as an innocent-seeming individual during attack-
ing in order to deceive the target. To discover a
novel jailbreak, the attacker must formulate and
exploit its own strategies through an iterative pro-
cess of trial and error. Some approaches adapt the
LLM attacker via finetuning with reward signals
(Perez et al., 2022); in another approach, tactics
discovered during successful trials are stored for
later reuse (Liu et al., 2024a). These solutions may
discover strategies never before documented. How-
ever, prior attempts with adaptive attackers have
yielded a semantically limited range of successful
attacks (see Beutel et al. (2024) for discussion),
or have only discovered a few dozen novel tac-
tics across many trials (Liu et al., 2024a). Such
approaches do not guarantee that the search for vul-
nerable areas would monitor within a reasonable
time frame the full combination space of previously
discovered queries, tactics, and styles. This consti-
tutes a lost opportunity, considering that such data
can be combined and exploited by attack generators
in various ways. This poses a problem for safety
teams that not only want to expand safety training
with novel attacks, but seek a system that account-
ably searches over any previously documented area
of the attack space in order to do so.
1.1
WildTeaming using WildJailbreak
However,
a
recently
proposed
framework
WILDTEAMING (Jiang et al., 2024c) discovers
an array of jailbreaks against popular LLMs by
combining within the attacker’s instructions text
samples from a large corpus of harmful queries
and jailbreak tactics. This open-source dataset,
called WILDJAILBREAK,
contains over 50K
harmful queries and over 13K jailbreak tactics
that were crowd-sourced from the Internet. The
authors illustrate that the approach outperforms
competing approaches on Harmbench (Mazeika
et al., 2024), a public jailbreaking benchmark,
including the gradient-based GCG (Zou et al.,
2023) as well as the black-box strategy PAIR
(Chao et al., 2024), the latter of which uses an
attacker LLM to formulate through trial and error
a successful strategy to transform a query into
a jailbreak.
Though WildTeaming generates a
diversity of attacks, it combines queries and tactics
at random, without exploiting previous attack
successes or employing optimization.
1.2
Optimizing Attacks using Adaptive
Instruction Composition
Whereas generation by trial and error struggles to
capture diverse exploration throughout attacking,
WildTeaming, as we will illustrate, is hindered by
its choice not to exploit attack successes, falling
short for safety teams that seek to identify in a rea-
sonable time frame and bias attacking toward the
array of attack themes and tactics that characterize
their in-house LLMs’ vulnerabilities. The space of
possible attack instructions defined by WildTeam-
ing — that is, the set of combinations of harmful
queries with some finite number of jailbreak tac-
tics drawn from WildJailbreak — is massive. For
instructions that draw one query and two tactics,
the space consists of over 50000 ∗130002 possibil-
ities; i.e., it constitutes over 8 trillion instructions.
An algorithm that balances diverse exploration of
this space with adaptation to vulnerabilities may
be profitably employed to augment safety training
sets in proportion with attack-success likelihood
across a wide range of possibilities, and would be
useful for identifying and patching vulnerabilities
as they emerge and re-emerge throughout continual
safety training or an adversarial set-up (Ge et al.,
2023; Jiang et al., 2024b). The effectiveness of
random combination would deteriorate as new at-
tacks or areas are identified or if a richer space of
combinations were to be explored, since this space
would grow rapidly with new contributions; but an
algorithm that searches selectively could scale with
these contributions. Moreover, under a scenario
in which red-teaming is being conducted against
a well-aligned LLM, a random-combination strat-
egy would struggle to identify successes at a high
rate; but an adaptive algorithm could exploit the
vulnerabilities it identifies.
We therefore introduce a novel framework,
ADAPTIVE INSTRUCTION COMPOSITION, that
that addresses the gap by integrating recent ad-
vances from multiple disciplines. The framework
supplants WildTeaming’s method of random text
combination along with a set of other baselines
on a set of effectiveness and diversity metrics, us-
ing bandit algorithms within reinforcement learn-
ing. The system combines texts into instructions
selectively, tractably balancing exploration with ex-

ploitation in the massive combinatorial space, in
order to jointly optimize attack effectiveness with
diversity. We employ as our algorithm of choice
Neural Thompson Sampling (Zhang et al., 2021), a
variant of the contextual multi-armed bandit. The
bandit trains over the course of attacking to approx-
imate the evaluator’s responses using Gaussian dis-
tributions defined over instruction compositions,
and compositions are selected in proportion with
these learned distributions to balance success maxi-
mization with diverse exploration. The architecture
consists of a lightweight neural network that takes
contrastive embeddings of combined text samples
as input (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019). These em-
beddings enable the network to scale to the massive
space under a limited time constraint, adapting only
a small number of parameters to generalize across
whole groups of semantically related texts.
2
Related Work
We focus on automated approaches to LLM red-
teaming — see, for example, Feffer et al. (2024);
Rawat et al. (2024); Purpura et al. (2025) for broad-
purpose surveys and Lin et al. (2024); Mo et al.
(2024) for thorough treatments. Early approaches
augment attack sets using text modification tech-
niques (Morris et al., 2020; Wallace et al., 2021;
Rocamora et al., 2024). More recent approaches
prompt or train an attacker LLM to generate at-
tacks (Perez et al., 2022; Ganguli et al., 2022).
Some of the most recent proposals employ attacker
LLMs in environments for conducting iterative at-
tacks, including PAIR (Chao et al., 2024), TAP
(Mehrotra et al., 2023), DAN (Shen et al., 2024),
and AutoDAN(-Turbo) (Liu et al., 2024b,a). These
systems evolve the content of an initial attack gen-
eration in an iterative chain, tasking the attacker
with formulating and exploiting its own tactics in
the process. Other more complex ecosystems (Ge
et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2024b) further develop
the iterative-attacking paradigm, but set up an ad-
versarial environment in which the attacker and
target respectively adapt their attack strategies and
defense strategies in tandem. WildTeaming (Jiang
et al., 2024c) discovers a relatively diverse array
of jailbreaks against popular LLMs by combining
within the attacker’s instructions randomly com-
bined texts from a large, open-source corpus of
crowd-sourced harmful queries and jailbreak tac-
tics, called WildJailbreak.
3
Problem Statement
We define our problem as follows. An attacker is
instructed in some way to generate successful at-
tacks against a target in a series of trials, and whose
attack strategy can be adapted using the outputs of
an evaluator. We want to devise and train a learning
mechanism that can compose attack instructions
from a massive combinatorial space of text samples
to jointly optimize attack effectiveness and diver-
sity. The evaluator’s outputs are revealed one at a
time, and because LLM generation is costly, the
outputs are revealed slowly, so that only a small
proper subset of possible instruction compositions
can be explored and leveraged to train the learning
mechanism.
4
Proposed Solution
We propose ADAPTIVE INSTRUCTION COMPO-
SITION to solve the problem. The framework em-
ploys reinforcement learning to balance exploration
with exploitation in a space of text-sample com-
binations, given an unknown reward function, to
tailor the attacker’s generations toward the array of
idiosyncratic vulnerabilities of an arbitrary target.
4.1
Data Strategy
We leverage WildTeaming data to showcase our
framework. In particular, we use a set of 50500
harmful queries ("vanilla queries") and 13311 jail-
break tactics that the authors mined from the Inter-
net, as well as WildTeaming’s attacker prompt to
serve as the instruction template to be filled in with
text samples.1 Our final solution leverages a neural
contextual bandit, which takes as input a feature
representation of the instruction composition. We
map vanilla queries and tactics to 768-dimensional
embeddings using the contrastively pre-trained Sen-
tence Transformer all-mpnet-base-v2 (Reimers
and Gurevych, 2019), and then reduce them to 10
dimensions using UMAP (McInnes et al., 2020) to
restrict the number of network parameters needed
for strong performance (see Appendix C.2 for more
details). For each instruction composition, we con-
catenate the embeddings of its component query
and tactics to serve as the network’s input. As we
will demonstrate, these embeddings allow us to
adapt only a small number of network parameters
to generalize across whole groups of semantically
related texts, thereby enabling us to scale the bandit
1See here for WildTeaming resources.

Figure 2: Adaptive selection of attack content followed by attack generation
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Instruction Composition
Input: Total trials T; total instruction candi-
dates K; vanilla queries Q = {q1, ..., q|Q|} and
jailbreak tactics J = {j1, ..., j|J |}; instruction
template tpl(·); feature map e(·); reward dis-
tribution function f(·|θ); attacker, target, and
evaluator models A(·), T (·), E(·).
for t = 1, 2, ..., T do
for k = 1, 2, ..., K do
1. Sample texts qt,k, jt,k,1, ..., jt,k,n
2. xt,k = e(qt,k)⌢e(jt,k,1)⌢...⌢e(jt,k,n)
3. ˆrt,k = f(xt,k|θt−1)
end for
4. k∗= arg maxk ˆrt,k
5. It,k∗= tpl(qt,k∗, jt,k∗,1, ..., jt,k∗,n)
6. attackt = A(It,k∗)
7. responset = T (attackt)
8. rt,k∗= E(attackt, responset)
9. Update θt−1 to θt using xt,k∗, rt,k∗
end for
to large datasets. In addition, concatenation allows
the network to capture generalizations about sam-
ple interactions. Finally, since the complete set
of instruction compositions is massive, we cannot
use the bandit to score all of them prior to attack-
ing; instead, the bandit will be passed during a
given trial a random subset of them, consisting of
K instruction candidates, following proposals
from the many-armed bandit literature (Wang et al.,
2008; Russo and Roy, 2020; Bayati et al., 2024).
4.2
Adaptive Instruction Composition
We implement an interactive environment consist-
ing of four models: a trio of LLMs consisting of the
attacker A(·), target T (·), and evaluator E(·), along
with a fourth model f(· | θ) that selects instruction
candidates adaptively using reinforcement learning.
The model is trained in an on-line fashion across
an experiment consisting of T trials.
In a given trial t, we randomly sample texts to
fully populate K candidate instruction composi-
tions. For each candidate instruction composition,
we sample a vanilla query qt,k ∈Q along with a
set of jailbreak tactics jt,k,1, ..., jt,k,n ∈J n (step
1 in Algorithm 1). The sample combination is
mapped to its corresponding embedding represen-
tation xt,k = e(qt,k)⌢e(jt,k,1)⌢...⌢e(jt,k,n) and
passed to f(· | θt−1), which scores it conditioned
on f’s most recently updated parameters, θt−1, re-
turning ˆrt,k = f(xt,k | θt−1) (steps 2 and 3). The
index of the highest scoring candidate, k∗, is then
computed, and the text samples used to construct
this candidate are combined into a given instruc-
tion template submitted to the attacker (steps 4
and 5). The attacker generates an attack based on
these instructions. The attack and response are
then passed to the evaluator to provide a safety
assessment, rt,k∗(steps 6-8). Finally, the embed-
ding representation of the selected instruction xt,k∗
and the evaluator’s assessment rt,k∗are passed to
a stochastic gradient descent algorithm to update
the parameters of f from θt−1 to θt, to better ap-
proximate the evaluator’s success distribution (step
9). Here we introduce a deduplication step: if the
selected instruction composition led to a successful
attack, then it is blocked from being considered by
f for use in future trials. f must therefore general-
ize success signals across input features to perform
successfully. The cycle repeats across T trials, at
which time the experiment concludes.
4.3
Algorithm Details
We opt to employ Neural Thompson Sampling
(Zhang et al., 2021), a recent contextual bandit
algorithm (Auer, 2002; Filippi et al., 2010; Li
et al., 2010; Agrawal and Goyal, 2013), to serve as
f(· | θ). Since our bandit selects over combinations
of components, we note that it constitutes a combi-
natorial neural bandit (Hwang et al., 2023). We
used the implementation given here (Zhang et al.,
2021), and describe the algorithm in terms of this
implementation in what follows. For a more de-

tailed specification, see Appendix A.
The bandit consists of a simple feed-forward neu-
ral network that takes as input the embedding rep-
resentations of the K instruction candidates, return-
ing continuously valued scores for each of them.
The network form, given L layers, is as follows:
f1 = W1x
fl = Wl ReLU(fl−1),
l = 2, ..., L
f(· | θ) = fL
(1)
The network parameters θ are trained continuously
across trials to minimize the ℓ2-regularized square
loss. At the end of each trial, (xt,k∗, rt,k∗) is passed
into the loss and θ is updated using stochastic gra-
dient descent with weight decay.
In a given trial t, the bandit approximates the
evaluator’s unknown reward distribution over the
space of attack-response interactions by comput-
ing from its parameters Gaussian reward distribu-
tions defined over its arms, xt,k. The predicted
reward ˆrt,k of each arm — i.e., the score assigned
to a given candidate composition — is sampled
proportional to its corresponding posterior reward
distribution. To compute the network’s posterior
distribution for a given arm xt,k, the mean reward
and reward variance fitted to the arm, µt,k and
σ2
t,k, must be computed from the network’s most
recently updated parameters. The mean is the net-
work output, and the variance is calculated from its
neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2020). Defin-
ing gθt−1(xt,k) := ∇θt−1f(xt,k|θt−1), we have:
µt,k = f(xt,k | θt−1)
σ2
t,k = λgθt−1(xt,k)⊤U−1
t−1 gθt−1(xt,k)
ˆrt,k ∼N(µt,k, σ2
t,k)
(2)
Note that λ, the loss-regularizing hyperparameter,
also serves here to scale variance.2 U is an uncer-
tainty matrix employed to compute variance. After
xt,k∗is selected by the bandit, U is updated as:
Ut = Ut−1 + gθt−1(xt,k∗) gθt−1(xt,k∗)⊤
(3)
Following the original authors, we speed up vari-
ance computation in (2) by only maintaining the
diagonal elements of U, approximating U−1 as
their inverses.
2The original authors in fact employ a second variance
multiplier, ν, which we found to yield similar effects relative
to λ, and so we fix ν = 1 in what follows. See Appendix A
and C.1 for more discussion.
5
Performance Simulations
This section compares Adaptive Instruction Com-
position first to WildTeaming’s approach of ran-
domly combining instructions, and then to an array
of alternative red-teaming strategies using Harm-
bench (Mazeika et al., 2024), a public jailbreak-
ing benchmark. We implement simulation envi-
ronments built off of the PyRIT software package
(Munoz et al., 2024), employing its framework of
asynchronous function calls to LLMs to speed up
simulations (see Section 8).
In our implementation of Adaptive Instruction
Composition, we employ a lightweight two-layer
bandit network with hidden dimensionality 100.
Network size thus totals to (10 + 10 + 1) ∗
100 + (100 + 1) ∗1 = 2201 weights for simu-
lations sampling one query and tactic, or to (e.g.)
(10+3∗10+1)∗100+(100+1)∗1 = 4201 weights
in simulations sampling one query and three tactics.
We serve K = 500 instruction candidates to the
network. At the end of each red-teaming trial, the
network trains on the results from the evaluator to
approximate reward distributions over instruction
compositions; the stochastic gradient descent algo-
rithm we employ uses a learning rate of 0.01 and
a weight decay mechanism that divides λ by trial
count, in line with the authors’ implementation of
Neural Thompson Sampling.
5.1
Comparison with WildTeaming
We implement two red-teaming environments:
one employing WildTeaming, and the other
employing Adaptive Instruction Composition. Our
environments use Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1
(Jiang et al., 2024a) as the attacker LLM, basing
our choice on analyses demonstrating its superior
attack performance relative to other LLMs
(Chao et al., 2024; Kour et al., 2024). We use
Llama-Guard-2-8B (Inan et al., 2023) as the
evaluator,
and perform separate experiments
against
targets
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2
(Jiang et al., 2023), Llama-3-70B-Instruct,
and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al.,
2024). In our Adaptive Instruction Composition
environment, we train two bandits against each of
the three targets: a subtle bandit that is biased
toward exploration by being initiated with λ = 1
across all targets, promoting strong regularization
and wide decision variance; and an aggressive
bandit that is biased toward exploitation by
being initiated with lower values for λ. For the

Figure 3: Attack success rates as rolling averages with window length 200
Target
WT
ASR
WT
Count
AIC Subtle
ASR
AIC Subtle
Count
AIC Aggr.
ASR
AIC Aggr.
Count
Mistral-7B
0.252
2521
0.363
3626
0.567
5673
Llama-3-70B
0.088
876
0.155
1552
0.450
4500
Llama-3.3-70B
0.183
1830
0.247
2465
0.558
5579
Table 1: ASR across the complete simulation
latter, we set λ = 0.1 against Mistral-7B and
λ = 0.01 against the Llama models.
In both
environments, we employ WildTeaming’s off-topic
pruner, which forces instruction composition
and attack generation to repeat if a classifier
(roberta-large-wanli, Liu et al. (2019, 2022))
deems the attack to be off-topic.3
To measure the effectiveness of the two strate-
gies, we use simple realizations of attack success
rate (ASR). Each environment is set up to return
results across T = 10000 trials. We construct local
attack success rates as rolling averages for each trial
t > 200, defined as ASRt =
1
200
Pt
i=t−200 ri,k∗,
where ri,k∗is the evaluator’s assessment for the ith
trial. Further, we construct global attack success
rate, defined as ASR across all 10000 trials. In
addition, we provide measures of diversity within
successful attacks, defined in two ways: first, in
terms of the number of unique component queries
selected by the bandit throughout red-teaming; sec-
ond, in terms of the average cosine similarity be-
tween embeddings of generated attacks as well as
between embeddings of component queries. We
follow WildTeaming in implementing the latter, but
see also Zhang et al. (2024); Shaib et al. (2025);
Tevet and Berant (2021).
As we can see in Figure 3 and Table 1, Adap-
tive Instruction Composition (AIC in the tables)
obtains a substantially higher ASR than WildTeam-
3We do not employ in either environment WildTeaming’s
low-risk pruner, since it leverages a classifier that was trained
in-house by WildTeaming’s developers.
ing (WT) for all three targets we test. We ob-
tain substantially higher rolling averages, full-
simulation ASRs, and attack counts, both for the
subtle and aggressive bandits. With regard to diver-
sity, we observe a tradeoff. Our aggressive bandits
indeed accumulate moderately higher counts of
unique queries leveraged relative to WildTeaming,
as shown in Table 2, but their average attack similar-
ities and average query similarities, as in Table 3,
are higher than those of WildTeaming. We see
this as potentially desirable, depending on the user:
they may want a system that can rapidly narrow in
on the themes constituting vulnerabilities (e.g., in
an adversarial set-up). The subtle bandit, on the
other hand, substantially surmounts WildTeaming
in terms of unique query count — even though its
ASR is not as high as the aggressive bandit’s — and
matches WildTeaming in terms of average similar-
ity metrics. The subtle bandit thus avoids selecting
unsucccessful combinations without obviously de-
prioritizing regions of the attack space, unlike the
aggressive bandit. To further validate this, we de-
veloped a temporal analysis that tracks diversity of
successful attacks as measured across the duration
of the simulation (see Table 7 and Table 8 in the