Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit
Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification
Masato Kamba
masato.kamba@nyx.foundation
Nyx Foundation
Japan
Hirotake Murakami
2009hirotake@gmail.com
Aichi Prefectural Aichi High School
of Technology and Engineering
Japan
Akiyoshi Sannai
sannai.akiyoshi.7z@kyoto-u.ac.jp
Department of Physics, Kyoto
University
Japan
Nyx Foundation
Japan
Abstract
Security-critical software is routinely audited by tools that rea-
son about vulnerabilities as repository-local code patterns. Yet
specification-governed systems—protocol stacks, consensus imple-
mentations, cryptographic libraries—are constrained by invariants
and correctness conditions defined in natural-language specifica-
tions. When a vulnerability arises from what the specification re-
quires rather than how code is written, code-level approaches lack
the representational vocabulary to detect it, and their false positives
resist systematic diagnosis.
We present SPECA, a specification-anchored security audit
framework that derives explicit, typed security properties from
natural-language specifications and audits implementations
through structured proof-attempt reasoning grounded in each
property. The framework yields three capabilities absent from
code-driven auditing: spec-dependent detections, controlled
cross-implementation comparison under a shared property
vocabulary, and false positives that decompose into interpretable,
pipeline-phase-traceable root causes.
On the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest (366 submis-
sions, 10 implementations), SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope vulnera-
bilities and independently discovers 4 bugs confirmed by developer
fix commits. On the RepoAudit C/C++ benchmark (15 projects),
SPECA matches the best published precision (88.9%) while surfac-
ing 12 candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth, two
confirmed by upstream maintainers. A multi-model analysis reveals
that more capable models audit more faithfully within property
scope, shifting the detection bottleneck from model reasoning to
property generation quality. All false positives trace to three recur-
ring root causes—trust boundary misunderstanding, code reading
errors, and specification misinterpretation—each yielding action-
able improvement targets.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy →Software and application security;
Systems security; • Computing methodologies →Artificial intel-
ligence.
Keywords
security auditing, property-based verification, large language mod-
els, specification mining, false positive analysis
CCS ’26, The Hague, The Netherlands
2026.
1
Introduction
In a recent security contest, 366 auditors examined ten implemen-
tations of the same cryptographic protocol specification. They col-
lectively identified fifteen vulnerabilities—buffer overflows, logic
errors, and consensus violations—all recognizable as local code de-
fects. Yet the bug was absent from all adjudicated contest findings:
a subtle defect in a core cryptographic library where the KZG proof
verification routine passed the original commitment array rather
than its deduplicated variant, silently undermining the mathemati-
cal guarantee that the entire verification scheme depends on. The
bug was not a coding mistake in any familiar pattern; it was a viola-
tion of an invariant that the specification defines but no code-level
auditing tool was designed to check.
This scenario reflects a structural blind spot in security audit-
ing. Security-critical systems—from network protocol stacks to dis-
tributed consensus implementations to cryptographic libraries—are
governed by natural-language specifications that encode invari-
ants, trust boundaries, and correctness conditions. Yet the tools
and methods that auditors rely on reason almost exclusively about
repository-local code patterns: dataflow anomalies, API misuse, and
syntactic bug templates. When a vulnerability arises not from how
code is written but from what the specification requires, these ap-
proaches lack the representational vocabulary to detect it—or to ex-
plain why they missed it. The consequences extend beyond missed
bugs: when a code-driven tool produces a false positive, there is no
structured account of which security expectation it was attempting
to verify, making triage slow and findings opaque.
Recent advances in automated security analysis have produced
increasingly sophisticated code-driven approaches. Repository-
level auditing agents scan entire codebases for bug patterns and
achieve broad coverage across diverse projects [6]. LLM-enhanced
static analyzers combine program representations with language
model reasoning to improve precision [10, 11]. Property generation
tools synthesize formal invariants from code to enable automated
verification [13]. These approaches succeed when vulnerabilities
manifest as recognizable code-level anomalies. However, they share
a fundamental limitation: they begin from the code and work out-
ward, rather than from the specification and work inward. As a
result, they cannot express—let alone verify—whether an imple-
mentation satisfies a security expectation that the specification
defines but the code never explicitly encodes. Their false positives,
consequently, resist systematic diagnosis: when a finding is wrong,
there is no principled way to determine why the tool’s security
reasoning diverged from reality.
arXiv:2604.26495v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai
Our key insight is that security auditing becomes both more
effective and more analyzable when vulnerabilities are represented
as violations of explicit security properties derived from specifica-
tions, rather than as repository-local code bug patterns. We derive
security properties—invariants, preconditions, postconditions, and
assumptions—from natural-language specifications and threat mod-
els, then systematically check whether implementations satisfy
them through structured proof-attempt auditing. This representa-
tion grounds each finding in a traceable security expectation and,
crucially, makes false positives more interpretable: in our analysis,
all confirmed false positives trace to three recurring root causes—
trust boundary misunderstanding, code reading errors, and spec-
ification misinterpretation—each traceable to a specific pipeline
phase rather than arising from opaque model predictions.
We implement this approach in SPECA, a specification-anchored
security audit framework that combines automated property deriva-
tion with expert augmentation, and evaluate it on two established
benchmarks. On the Sherlock benchmark—10 implementations
of the same protocol specification, reviewed by 366 professional
auditors—our main results are as follows:
(1) Expert-augmented recall: SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope
H/M/L vulnerabilities (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low) and in-
dependently discovers 4 additional bugs confirmed by de-
veloper fix commits—including a cryptographic invariant
violation absent from all 366 adjudicated contest submis-
sions.
(2) Automated-only baseline: The fully automated pipeline
(Phases 1–6 without manual property injection) recovers
8 of 15 issues. The gap identifies cryptographic invariants
and protocol-lifecycle rules as the concrete frontier for auto-
mated property generation.
(3) Cluster-level precision: When multiple findings targeting
the same root cause are grouped into a single cluster, strict
precision rises from 26.4% (finding-level) to 48.7% (cluster-
level), reflecting a property neighborhood effect where com-
plementary properties jointly characterize each issue.
On the RepoAudit C/C++ benchmark (15 projects, 35 non-disputed
ground-truth bugs), SPECA identifies 12 author-validated candidate
bugs beyond the established ground truth at 88.9% precision (Son-
net 4.5); an intermediate model (Sonnet 4) discovers 18 candidates
at 81.2% precision, and a partially controlled same-backbone com-
parison (DeepSeek R1) discovers 7 at 72.7%. The non-monotonic
relationship between model capability and discovery count reveals
a property adherence effect: more capable models audit more faith-
fully within the stated property scope, reducing false positives but
also reducing serendipitous beyond-property discoveries—making
property generation quality the binding constraint on detection cov-
erage as models improve. Detailed analysis of 16 representative false
positives reveals that they trace to three recurring root causes—trust
boundary misunderstanding (50%), code reading errors (37.5%), and
specification misinterpretation (12.5%)—each traceable to a specific
pipeline phase.
SPECA should be understood not primarily as a cheaper
bug-finding
tool,
but
as
a
specification-anchored
audit
framework—combining automated property derivation with
expert augmentation—that makes both detections and failures
more analyzable. Its value lies not only in what it finds, but in the
structured account of why it finds—or fails to find—each issue.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We present the design of SPECA, a property-centered secu-
rity auditing framework that derives explicit security prop-
erties from natural-language specifications and uses them to
drive structured proof-attempt auditing of implementations.
In its expert-augmented configuration, SPECA recovers all
15 in-scope H/M/L vulnerabilities on the Sherlock bench-
mark (automated-only: 8/15) and independently discovers 4
bugs confirmed by developer fix commits. On the RepoAudit
benchmark, SPECA identifies 7–18 author-validated candi-
date bugs beyond the established ground truth across three
model configurations, while matching the best baseline pre-
cision with a sufficiently capable model. A multi-model anal-
ysis reveals that more capable models audit more faithfully
against stated properties, identifying property generation as
the binding constraint on coverage (§3, §4).
• We demonstrate that SPECA’s false positives trace to three
interpretable root causes, each traceable to a specific pipeline
phase, yielding ranked, actionable improvement targets.
We report precision at three granularities—strict H/M/L-
match (26.4%), confirmed-useful (59.7%), and broad security-
relevance (66.7%)—enabling readers to assess effectiveness
under different interpretations of true positives (§4, §5).
• We show that holding a shared property vocabulary
constant
across
implementations
enables
controlled
cross-implementation security comparison, revealing where
specification-implementation
alignment
systematically
diverges across 10 client implementations (§4, §5).
• We provide a systematic property-type ablation, document
the empirical evolution from a 5-gate to a 3-gate severity-
preserving review filter, and quantify the gap between auto-
mated and expert-augmented property generation, establish-
ing design principles for recall-first security analysis systems
(§4, §5).
2
Related Work
We organize related work along three axes and summarize the
closest systems in Table 1. Appendix A provides a full discussion;
here we highlight what distinguishes SPECA.
LLM-augmented code-level detection combines LLM reason-
ing with program analysis to improve code-driven bug detection.
LLift [10] and BugLens [11] guide LLMs through structured rea-
soning for kernel use-before-initialization and taint-style bugs;
IRIS [12] and LLMxCPG [9] combine LLMs with CodeQL or
code property graphs; and RepoAudit [6] deploys an autonomous
repository-level agent. These systems all start from repository-local
information: dataflow, code property graphs, or path constraints.
When correctness depends on normative requirements that the
code never explicitly encodes, code-level starting points cannot
express whether an implementation satisfies its intended security
expectation [5, 19].
LLM-driven property generation uses language models to
synthesize formal properties for verification. PropertyGPT [13]

Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Table 1: Comparative summary of approaches closest to
SPECA. SPECA’s primary differentiators are the combina-
tion of explicit property grounding, cross-implementation
comparability, and structured false-positive analysis.
Axis
Repo-
Audit
Property-
GPT
RFCAudit
SPECA
Source of expectations
Code paths
Code +
properties
RFC NL
NL spec +
threat models
Unit of reasoning
Bug pattern
Formal
property
RFC clause
Typed property
(inv/pre/post/asm)
Cross-impl. comparability
No
No
No
Yes
Structured FP taxonomy
No
No
No
Yes (3 causes,
phase-origin)
(NDSS’25 Distinguished Paper), GPTScan [18], and iAudit [14] tar-
get smart contracts; FormalBench [8] benchmarks LLMs’ ability
to infer formal specifications, finding that multi-phase pipelines
with structured review are necessary for reliable inference. These
approaches share SPECA’s emphasis on explicit properties as the
unit of analysis, but derive them primarily from code or existing
properties rather than authoritative natural-language specifications,
and focus predominantly on smart contracts.
Specification-driven analysis derives security expectations from
specifications. RFCAudit [21] audits protocol implementations
against RFCs with a hierarchical code-indexing agent; EDEFuzz [17]
fuzzes web APIs using API specifications; Jin et al. [7] directly study
LLMs verifying code against natural-language specifications and
find that complex prompting paradoxically increases false-negative
rates due to overcorrection bias—a result that motivates SPECA’s
structured pipeline with recall-first filtering. Work in formal verifi-
cation further shows that even ideal specifications [2] can fail to
capture intuitively expected security properties. RFCAudit is closest
in spirit to SPECA but uses implicit RFC compliance as the unit of
reasoning, whereas SPECA derives explicit, typed security proper-
ties (invariants, preconditions, postconditions, assumptions) and
provides cross-implementation comparison under a shared prop-
erty vocabulary plus a structured false-positive taxonomy traced to
pipeline-phase origins. Related property-enforcement work [4, 15]
and studies of specification–implementation gaps in blockchain sys-
tems [20] further situate specification-based analysis as an active
research area that SPECA extends from enforcement to auditing.
3
SPECA Framework Design
3.1
Overview
SPECA automates the workflow of a specification-aware security
auditor through a six-phase pipeline organized into two stages:
knowledge structuring (Phases 1–3), which transforms natural-
language specifications into explicit security properties, and system-
atic auditing (Phases 4–6), which applies structured proof-attempt
reasoning to check whether implementations satisfy those proper-
ties.
Figure 1 illustrates the end-to-end pipeline. At a high level,
SPECA first builds a structured representation of what the code
should do—derived from specifications and threat models—and then
systematically checks whether the code actually does it through
proof construction. By grounding every finding in a traceable se-
curity property, SPECA makes both its detections and its false
positives interpretable.
The workflow proceeds in six phases:
(1) Specification Discovery (Phase 1): Crawl specification doc-
uments and produce a structured index.
(2) Subgraph Extraction (Phase 2): Decompose each specifica-
tion into program graphs with invariant annotations derived
from RFC 2119 modal verbs, following Nielson and Niel-
son [16].
(3) Property Generation (Phase 3): Apply STRIDE threat mod-
eling with CWE Top 25 augmentation to derive typed secu-
rity properties (Table 3) from subgraphs and the bug bounty
scope.
(4) Code Pre-resolution (Phase 4): Link each property to con-
crete source locations using Tree-sitter symbol analysis, re-
ducing downstream audit tokens by 40–60%.
(5) Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5): For each property,
attempt to construct a structured proof that it holds; gaps
constitute findings.
(6) Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6): Filter false positives
through three narrow mechanical gates (dead code, trust
boundary, scope) designed to preserve H/M/L recall.
In multi-implementation settings, Phases 1–3 execute once
against the specification, producing a shared property vocabulary;
Phases 4–6 then execute independently for each target implemen-
tation, enabling controlled cross-implementation comparison by
holding security expectations constant while varying the code un-
der audit.
3.2
Threat Model and Property Vocabulary
SPECA targets implementation-level vulnerabilities in specification-
governed software that could lead to correctness failures, denial
of service, information disclosure, or privilege escalation. Specifi-
cations themselves and the bug-bounty scope document (which
defines trust boundaries and severity thresholds) are trusted; inter-
component communication channels are semi-trusted (may carry
malformed but protocol-compliant data); and external user inputs
are untrusted. Table 2 summarizes the trust-boundary model used
throughout the audit pipeline. SPECA does not target specification-
level flaws, hardware attacks, or vulnerabilities that require dy-
namic execution to observe (e.g., race conditions). We assume:
(1) specifications are available in machine-readable form (e.g.,
Markdown, HTML) with normative requirements expressed us-
ing RFC 2119 modal verbs; (2) source code of the target imple-
mentation is accessible for static analysis; and (3) a bug-bounty
scope document or equivalent defines the audit perimeter and trust
boundaries.
Phase 3 synthesizes each property from six sources—STRIDE
threats, trust-boundary obligations, specification assumptions,
subgraph invariants (INV-*), state transitions, and optimization-
correctness constraints—and assigns one of four types. Table 3
summarizes the vocabulary.

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai
Figure 1: The SPECA pipeline. Phases 1–3 (Knowledge Structuring) derive security properties from specifications; Phases 4–6
(Systematic Auditing) verify properties against implementations. In multi-implementation settings, the left stage executes
once and the right stage executes per target.
Table 2: Trust boundary model used throughout the audit
pipeline. Each boundary is mapped to a trust level that
Phase 6’s trust-boundary gate checks against attack-path
sources.
Boundary
Trust Level
Rationale
Specification documents
TRUSTED
Correctness oracle
Bug bounty scope
TRUSTED
Defines audit perimeter
Internal component APIs
SEMI_TRUSTED
Malformed but valid data
External/user-facing inputs
UNTRUSTED
Attacker-controlled
Table 3: The four property types in SPECA’s vocabulary.
Type
Definition
Example
Invariant
Holds at all times
Nodes maintain ≥
CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT
columns
Precondition
Holds before an
operation
Input length equals
commitment count before
verification
Postcondition
Holds after
operation
completes
New custody set covers
required subnets after
rotation
Assumption
Assumed but not
enforced by
component
Execution layer returns
valid block data via
Engine API
3.3
Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5)
Phase 5 is the core reasoning phase. For each property, the auditor
attempts to construct a proof that the property holds in the imple-
mentation; gaps in the proof constitute findings. Figure 2 shows
the per-property audit flow, and Algorithm 1 presents the detailed
procedure.
Each property is processed in three sub-phases. Map: decompose
the property’s assertion into verifiable sub-claims, read the enforce-
ment code completely (full function bodies plus callers/callees),
and link each sub-claim to the code responsible for satisfying it.
Prove: verify input coverage, path coverage, concurrency safety,
temporal validity, and implementation-pattern obligations (e.g.,
Algorithm 1 Property-Grounded Audit per Property
Require: Property 𝑃with assertion 𝐴, code scope 𝐶
Ensure: Finding 𝐹or verification Pass
1: procedure Audit(𝑃, 𝐶)
2:
sub_claims ←Decompose(𝐴)
3:
code_map ←Map(sub_claims,𝐶)
⊲Sub-phase 1
4:
for each claim 𝑠in sub_claims do
5:
proof ←Prove(𝑠, code_map[𝑠])
⊲Sub-phase 2
6:
if proof .fails then
7:
gap ←proof .failure_point
8:
attack ←StressTest(gap,𝐶)
⊲Sub-phase 3
9:
if attack.plausible then
10:
return Finding(𝑃.id, Vuln, gap, attack)
11:
else
12:
return Finding(𝑃.id, Potential, gap, ∅)
13:
end if
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
return Pass
17: end procedure
cache keys and deduplication keys computed from complete in-
puts); gaps are recorded as findings. Stress-test: challenge the con-
clusion by either re-examining every assumption (if the proof suc-
ceeded) or attempting to construct a concrete attack path (if it
failed); findings without a plausible attack path are downgraded to
potential-vulnerability. We use “proof attempt” to be precise:
Phase 5 is LLM-driven evidence construction with structured rea-
soning steps, not formal verification. The structured proof-attempt
framing was chosen over an adversarial “find bugs” framing after
preliminary experiments showed the adversarial approach pro-
duced an 88% false positive rate: without a structured claim to
disprove, the model produced numerous speculative findings with
weak grounding, whereas the proof-attempt framing forces the
model to commit to a verifiable claim before reporting a gap.
Worked example. Consider the property “The KZG batch ver-
ification challenge must be computed from the deduplicated
commitment array.” In Sub-phase 1 (Map), the auditor identifies
compute_verify_cell_kzg_proof_batch_challenge at line 877
of the target library as the enforcement location. In Sub-phase 2

Beyond Code Reasoning: A Specification-Anchored Audit Framework for Expert-Augmented Security Verification CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Figure 2: Phase 5 audit flow for a single property. Each property undergoes three sub-phases: Map (decompose assertion into
sub-claims), Prove (verify each sub-claim against code), and Stress-Test (validate or challenge the conclusion).
(Prove), the auditor traces the data flow and discovers that the func-
tion receives commitments_bytes (the original array with dupli-
cates) rather than unique_commitments (the deduplicated array),
breaking the mathematical guarantee of the verification scheme.
In Sub-phase 3 (Stress-Test), the auditor confirms that a crafted set
of duplicate commitments could cause the challenge hash to differ
from the specification’s expectation, enabling a proof to pass verifi-
cation incorrectly. The result is classified as a vulnerability with
severity High—a cryptographic correctness bug that 366 human
auditors in a concurrent security contest did not detect (§4.3).
3.4
Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6)
Security auditing faces an asymmetric risk: a missed H/M/L true
positive is costlier than a false positive that requires triage time.
SPECA’s review phase therefore prioritizes severity preservation: it
may only dispute findings through three narrow, mechanical gates
designed to be recall-safe for H/M/L findings.
Gate 1: Dead Code. If a flagged function has zero non-test
callers (and is not part of a public API), the finding is classified
as DISPUTED_FP.
Gate 2: Trust Boundary. If the attack path’s data source is clas-
sified as TRUSTED or SEMI_TRUSTED in the scope document and no
alternative untrusted input path exists, the finding is classified as
DISPUTED_FP.
Gate 3: Scope Check. Findings targeting scope-excluded cate-
gories, pre-existing issues, or out-of-scope components are classi-
fied as DISPUTED_FP.
Only these three gates may produce a DISPUTED_FP verdict; no
other reasoning about design intent, code quality, or subjective
judgment may dispute a finding. The current three-gate design
was simplified from a five-gate prototype after two gates (Spec
Cross-Reference, Exploitability) were found to cause recall loss on
informational true positives while providing negligible precision
improvement (§4.3; Appendix C.6). Surviving findings then receive
severity calibration against the scope document’s impact-based
classification thresholds.
3.5
Cross-Implementation Audit Workflow
When auditing multiple implementations of the same specification,
Phases 1–3 execute once, producing a shared property vocabulary,
and Phases 4–6 execute independently per implementation. This
holds security expectations constant while varying the code un-
der test, producing a controlled comparison: the same property
vocabulary yields systematically different distributions of true posi-
tives, false positives, and disputes across implementations, revealing
where specification–implementation alignment diverges. Appen-
dix B.3 details the implementation (orchestration, fault tolerance,
token budgeting, models, and tool usage).
4
Evaluation
4.1
Research Questions
RQ1: How effective is SPECA at auditing specification-
governed implementations, and what explains its successes
and failures? This question evaluates SPECA’s core contributions
on a large-scale, multi-implementation benchmark derived from a
professional security contest. We measure both detection effective-
ness (recall, precision) and the structure of successes and failures—
requiring that both be traceable to specific pipeline mechanisms.
RQ2: How does SPECA compare to code-driven auditing ap-
proaches, and does the property-centered representation pro-
duce qualitatively different outcomes? We compare SPECA
against published code-driven baselines on an independent bench-
mark and test whether specification-grounded representation yields
distinctive outcomes: (i) discovery of bugs beyond the established
ground truth, and (ii) qualitatively different security judgments on
disputed patterns.
4.2
Experimental Setup
RQ1 benchmark (Sherlock). We evaluate SPECA on the Sherlock
Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest, a professional security competition
targeting 10 production Ethereum client implementations of EIP-
7594 (PeerDAS) and EIP-7691. The contest received 366 submissions
from professional auditors, of which 15 were judged valid at High,
Medium, or Low severity (5 H, 2 M, 8 L). The 10 targets span five
programming languages (Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C) and range
from full consensus-layer clients (Lighthouse, Prysm, Grandine,
Nimbus, Lodestar, Nethermind) to cryptographic libraries (c-kzg-
4844, rust-eth-kzg) and execution-layer components (Reth, Alloy
EVM). This setting provides ecological validity: the ground truth is
established by independent expert adjudication in a real security

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Kamba, Murakami, and Sannai
Table 4: Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest benchmark
characteristics.
Characteristic
Value
Target implementations
10
Programming languages
Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C
Contest submissions
366
Valid issues (H/M/L)
15 (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low)
Severity thresholds
Network-impact-based
Table 5: Finding label definitions. Precision = non-FP rate:
all labels except fp_invalid and fp_review count as non-FP.
*potential-info findings are plausible security observations
below the threshold for confirmed vulnerability.
Label
Definition
TP?
tp
Matches valid H/M/L contest issue
Yes
tp_info
Informational-severity or real low-severity
Yes
fixed
Independently fixed on target repository
Yes
partially_fixed
Partially addressed
Yes
potential-info
Plausible but unconfirmed
Yes*
fp_invalid
False positive (invalid reasoning)
No
fp_review
False positive (review-gate error)
No
engagement, not synthetic bug injection. Direct comparison with
individual contest participants is precluded by confidentiality; we
therefore evaluate in absolute terms against the expert-adjudicated
ground truth and reserve head-to-head baseline comparison for
RQ2.
RQ2 benchmark (RepoAudit). We evaluate on the RepoAu-
dit benchmark [6]: 15 open-source C/C++ projects with 35 non-
disputed ground-truth bugs (null-pointer dereferences, memory
leaks, and use-after-free) confirmed by developer fixes, plus 5 dis-
puted bugs. We compare against published baseline numbers from
Guo et al. [6] (four RepoAudit model configurations) and two in-
dustrial static analyzers (Meta Infer, Amazon CodeGuru). We do
not report recall comparatively because the ground truth was con-
structed from RepoAudit’s own discoveries, making recall compari-
son structurally unfair.
Metrics. We report precision (non-false-positive rate), recall on the
H/M/L contest issues, and a strict H/M/L-match rate. Issue match-
ing uses LLM-assisted semantic matching followed by two-author
manual verification (initial agreement 93%, disagreements resolved
by consensus). A match is accepted only when both the root cause
(the specific code-level deficiency) and the security impact (the con-
sequence for system security) align between the SPECA finding and
the ground-truth issue; partial matches—where a SPECA finding
identifies the same code location but attributes a different security
impact—are recorded separately and excluded from recall. Many-to-
one matches (multiple SPECA findings to one issue) are handled by
counting the issue as recovered if at least one finding matches, while
each finding is counted independently for precision. Each finding
is labeled as true positive (tp, tp_info, fixed, partially_fixed,
potential-info) or false positive (fp_invalid, fp_review); Ta-
ble 5 lists the full label definitions.
Table 6: SPECA detection effectiveness on the Sherlock bench-
mark. The gap between strict precision (26.4%) and broad
precision (66.7%) is explained by the property neighborhood
effect (one issue detected by multiple complementary prop-
erties) and by informational-severity/independently-fixed
findings outside the contest’s severity-gated scope.
Metric
Value
Total findings (Phase 5, pre-review)
102
Total findings (Phase 6, post-review)
72
Confirmed FPs (post-review)
24 (33.3%)
H/M/L recovered (expert-augmented)
15 / 15 (100%)
H/M/L recovered (automated-only)
8 / 15 (53%)
Novel bugs confirmed by fix commits
4
Precision at three granularities (post-review, N=72):
Strict (H/M/L match)
26.4% (19/72)
Confirmed-useful
59.7% (43/72)
Broad (non-FP rate)
66.7% (48/72)
We report precision at three granularities (strict H/M/L match,
confirmed-useful, and broad non-FP rate) to enable readers to as-
sess SPECA’s effectiveness under different interpretations of true
positives.
Implementation and cost. SPECA is implemented in Python with
an asynchronous orchestration framework. Phases 1–3 use Claude
Opus for specification understanding; Phases 4–6 use Claude Son-
net for code analysis and review. Total API cost was approximately
$400–620 for RQ1 and $81.05 ($1.69/bug) for the RQ2 primary con-
figuration (Sonnet 4.5); a multi-model sensitivity analysis (Sonnet 4,
DeepSeek R1) yielded $93–101 total per model. We release evalua-
tion scripts, per-repository outputs, and all generated artifacts as