PrivSTRUCT: Untangling Data Purpose
Compliance of Privacy Policies in Google Play
Store
Bhanuka Silva1[0009−0000−6558−6514], Anirban Mahanti1[0009−0003−9030−9916],
Aruna Seneviratne2[0000−0001−6894−7987], and Suranga
Senevirante1[0000−0002−5485−5595]
1 The University of Sydney, Australia
{bpin9254,anirban.mahanti,suranga.seneviratne}@sydney.edu.au
2 University of New South Wales, Australia
a.seneviratne@unsw.edu.au
Abstract. Existing research typically treats privacy policies as flat, uni-
form text, extracting information without regard for the document’s log-
ical hierarchy. Disregard for structural cues of section headings designed
to guide the reader, often leads automated methods to entangle dis-
tinct data practices, particularly when linking sensitive data items to
their specific purposes. To address this, we introduce PrivSTRUCT, a
novel and systematic encoder and decoder combined framework that to
untangle complex privacy disclosures. Benchmarking against the state-
of-the-art tool PoliGrapher reveals that PrivSTRUCT robustly extracts
more than x2 the number of data item and purpose excerpts while re-
taining developer-defined structural cues. By applying PrivSTRUCT to
a large-scale dataset of 3,756 Android apps, we uncover a critical trans-
parency gap: the probability of developers overstating a data purpose is
20.4% higher for first-party collection and 9.7% higher for third-party
sharing when they rely on globally defined purposes rather than specific,
locally scoped disclosures. Alarmingly, we find that sensitive third-party
data flows such as sharing financial data for analytics are frequently di-
luted and entangled into generic or unrelated categories, highlighting a
persistent failure in the current purpose disclosure landscape.
Keywords: Privacy Policies · Privacy Compliance · Google Play Store
· Language Models · Direct Preference Optimisation
1
Introduction
Privacy policies are to inform users about data collection and usage practices,
yet they are notoriously complex and lengthy, often leading individuals to skip
reading them altogether [17, 3, 22]. Regulations such as the EU General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR), the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA),
and the Australian Privacy Principles (APPs) have sought to improve trans-
parency. However, these efforts have paradoxically increased policy intricacy,
arXiv:2604.22157v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

2
Silva B. et al.
What information do we collect?
Personal Information
Non-Personal Information
When do we collect information?
What do we use your information for?
Personal Information
Non-Personal Information
We may use Non-Personal Information for any purpose as below:
   personalize user experience,
   improve our Mobile Apps or its services,
   improve user service and respond to queries and emails of our users,
   run and operate our Mobile Apps or its Services.
... Information You Give Us. This includes:
the personal data you provide when you report a problem ...
the personal data you provide when you correspond with us by email.
... may include the information about your devices and technical
information such as the versions of phone model and other similar
information.
We may use the personal information you provided to answering your
inquiry or responding to a communication from you.
...
Main
Sub
Sub
Sub
Sub
Main
Main
First
First
First
How- Used?
How- Used?
How- Used?
What?
What?
What?
First
Other
First
First
First
Other Personal 
Device ID
Other Personal 
Developer Communication
Personalisation
App Analytics
App Analytics
App Functionality
Other Personal 
Device ID
First Party Collection / Use
What Data Items?
For What Purposes?
/ How Used?
Locally defined purpose
Globally defined purposes
4K Wallpapers - Auto Changer
Developer: HD Pro Walls
10M+ downloads, 189k reviews (4.6⛤)
This app may share these data types with third parties
Location, App activity and 2 others
This app may collect these data types
Location and Device or other IDs
Data is encrypted in transit
Data can’t be deleted
Location
Approximate location
Device or other IDs
Device or other IDs
Analytics, Advertising or marketing, Fraud prevention,
security and compliance
App functionality, Analytics, Advertising or marketing
!
!
Fig. 1. Left: Privacy policy portion of ‘HD Pro Walls’ developer related to first party
collection details. Right: The data safety declaration of the developer’s app called ‘4K
Wallpapers - Auto Changer’, with nearly 10M+ downloads, yet contradicting with the
policy itself based on data practices. Extracted on December, 2025
making them even less accessible [10, 16]. In the mobile app ecosystem, where
users increasingly rely on applications for daily tasks, this issue is amplified.
App marketplaces like the Google Play Store require developers to provide sum-
marised data practices through Android data safety labels [1], which outline
collected or shared data items and their purposes in a more straightforward
manner. However, these self-declared labels must align with the legally binding
full privacy policy document in order to avoid misleading users and ensure com-
pliance [20]. Yet, as we demonstrate in this work, such alignments are frequently
undermined by structural ambiguities in the policies themselves.
Empirical observations reveal that many policies separate descriptions of
data items (e.g., “name” or “email address”) from their purposes (e.g., “app an-
alytics” or “personalisation”), often across distinct sections. This isolation can
prompt users to make blanket consents, assuming broad applicability without
clear linkages, potentially leading to unfair data processing. Figure 1 depicts
“locally-defined” purposes where specific data like personal information is ex-
plicitly linked to developer communication and “globally-defined” purposes where
ambiguous text forces readers to guess and map disconnected data items like de-
vice IDs to the purposes such as app analytics, functionality and personalisation
defined in later sections of the privacy policy. This figure also depicts how as-
signing meaningful labels to the main and sub section headings can structurally
link disjoint elements. In this example, data items related to first-party collection
/ use are globally mapped with homogeneous data purpose declarations based
on these labels. In the right is the data safety declaration of the most popular
app by this developer with nearly 10M+ downloads, which alarmingly indicates
that they collect approximate location from end-users for analytics, advertising,
fraud prevention security and compliance but this is not defined at all in the

PrivSTRUCT
3
privacy policy, indicating a major contradiction when regulatory frameworks re-
quire consistency across both forms of disclosure. Additionally, use of device IDs
for advertising or marketing is also not disclosed in policy as well.
Existing natural language processing (NLP) approaches often exacerbate this
issue by either analysing policies as flat sequences of text, or disregarding the
hierarchical cues (such as section headings) that developers use to scope these
claims, or by not considering the data purposes altogether. Consequently, these
methods risk extracting undistinguished relationships that misrepresent the true
granularity of the developer’s disclosure. To this end, we propose PrivSTRUCT
(Privacy policy Structural Tagging for Robust Understanding and Compliance
Tracing), a novel framework that resolves policy ambiguity by systematically
leveraging the developer-intended structural hierarchy. PrivSTRUCT utilises
a hybrid architecture combining decoder-based high-level structural extraction
with encoder-based classification for granular semantic analysis. This allows us
to not only map the logical flow of a policy but to specifically categorise section
headings by intent, distinguishing between segments that define what data is col-
lected, why it is processed, why it is shared, etc. By reconstructing these depen-
dency links, PrivSTRUCT can accurately differentiate between locally defined
purposes (tied to specific data items) and globally defined mandates, enabling a
far more precise audit of Play Store Data Safety Labels than previously possible.
More specifically, our contributions include:
– PrivSTRUCT, a novel systematic framework that combines the natural lan-
guage understanding (NLU) capabilities of decoder-based LLMs with the
classification-efficiency of encoder-based models to analyse privacy policies.
It leverages structural cues to untangle the relationships between data items
and purposes. We introduce a Direct Preference Optimisation (DPO) pipeline
to fine-tune smaller, open-source models (Llama-3.1) for structural extrac-
tion, achieving performance comparable to proprietary state-of-the-art mod-
els while significantly reducing computational overhead.
– We benchmark PrivSTRUCT against PoliGraph, a state-of-the-art NLP tool
for privacy policy analysis. Our evaluation on a diverse test set reveals that
in average PoliGraph only identifies 52.1% and 89.1% less number of unique
data items and data purposes compared to our method.
– We conduct a large-scale empirical analysis of 3,756 privacy policies and their
corresponding Google Play Data Safety labels 3. We characterise the land-
scape of “Purpose Compliance” and “Purpose Dilution”, revealing that the
probability of developers overstating purposes is 20.4% higher for first-party
collection and 9.7% higher for third-party sharing as they increasingly rely
on globally defined purposes. Alarmingly, we find that critical third-party
data flows such as sharing financial data for analytics are frequently diluted
into generic or unrelated categories within the policy text, undermining the
transparency goals of modern app marketplaces.
3 Dataset is available via https://github.com/NSS-USYD/PrivCORPUS/

4
Silva B. et al.
2
Related Work
Prior efforts to demystify privacy policies relied on traditional NLP for summari-
sation and decision support [13, 23, 24, 14, 32, 18]. These methods were eventu-
ally superseded by encoder-based transformers and related architectures [2, 27].
More recently, the landscape has shifted toward generative approaches, which
are increasingly demonstrating remarkable efficacy in zero- and few-shot policy
understanding [29, 21, 26, 8].
Extracting structured information from policy text via semantic analysis is
crucial for tasks such as consistency checking. PolicyLint [4] introduced linguistic
analysis to extract (data type, entity) tuples from individual sentences, enabling
the detection of internal contradictions. Building on this, PurPliance [7] ex-
tended the tuple structure to identify processing purpose clauses, allowing for
comparisons against actual app behaviour. Similarly, PolicyChecker [5] lever-
aged semantic analysis roles to audit the consistency between policy disclosures
and app code. However, these approaches rely on isolated sentence-level analy-
sis; they cannot resolve dependencies across multiple sections of a policy, often
resulting in extracted tuples that are disconnected or ambiguous. Alternative
frameworks like PolicyComp [31] attempt to bypass these extraction challenges
by benchmarking policies against those of similar ‘counterpart’ apps, but this
merely identifies statistical outliers and does not resolve the fundamental inabil-
ity of current models to handle complex, cross-section dependencies
Recent work PoliGraph [9] moves beyond linear text analysis by modelling
privacy policies as knowledge graphs. In this architecture, data types and entities
function as nodes, connected by two primary edge relations: SUBSUME, which
maps generic terms to specific definitions, and COLLECT, which links entities
to the data they acquire. PoliGraph identifies 40% more collection statements
than prior state-of-the-art while achieving 97% precision, however, ‘purposes’
of such collections are treated merely as a secondary attribute attached to the
COLLECT edge. This dependency presents a significant limitation: purposes in
complex policy text are frequently ambiguous or syntactically detached from
explicit collection verbs. As a result, purposes are not always well-defined solely
by the existence of a link between an entity and a data type. This structural
rigidity often leads to missed or misattributed purposes, underscoring the need
for more robust identification methods. PrivPRISM [25] is a LLM decoder and
encoder combined framework specifically designed to extract data items and pur-
poses for compliance auditing. Despite its efficiency for robust data extraction,
it does not explicitly infer non-trivial relationships between data items and pur-
poses. PrivPRISM introduces section heading extraction as an integral part of
the framework but do not deep dive into intentions of the headings. To address
these limitations, the PrivSTRUCT framework introduced in this paper lever-
ages previously ignored developer-disclosed intentions within section headings.
By modelling this high-level policy flow, PrivSTRUCT establishes robust links
between disconnected subsections, enabling the precise mapping of otherwise
ambiguous, globally-defined purposes.

PrivSTRUCT
5
Privacy
Policy Text
(sanitised)
Heading Extraction
Preference Optimised
Llama3.1-8B-Instruct
Heading List and Heading-Tags
Heading
Contents
Data Practice Labels
Data Intention Labels
Data Item Extraction
Data Purpose Extraction
Data Item Labels
Data Purpose Labels
Llama3.1-8B-Instruct
F.T. PrivBERT models
First Party Collection
What?
How-Used?
Device ID
Other Personal
Analytics
Dev. Communi.
Functionality
Global purpose
mapping
Well-defined
purposes
1
2
Fig. 2. PrivSTRUCT framework
3
PrivSTRUCT Framework
This section first details the privacy policy dataset, followed by a breakdown
of each module within the PrivSTRUCT framework (the complete pipeline is
illustrated in Figure 2). Finally, we introduce the metrics used to characterise
data purpose compliance and purpose dilution.
3.1
Dataset
We analyse a corpus of 3,756 unique privacy policies associated with 6,540 of
the most downloaded apps on the Google Play Store, crawled during the first
half of 2024. By restricting our analysis to policies with a sanitised text file size
< 50KB, we capture 97% of the initially observed top policies while exclud-
ing statistical outliers (the corpus average is 18.3KB). Focusing on top-ranked
applications aligns with the findings of Khandelwal et al. [15], who note that de-
velopers of high-visibility apps typically provide more robust declarations due to
heightened public scrutiny and available resources. Notably, this dataset reveals
a widespread pattern of policy reuse; major developers frequently govern multi-
ple high-traffic apps under a single, unified text. To ensure accurate compliance
attribution, we map each unique privacy policy strictly to the developer’s most
downloaded application.
Categorically, the dataset is dominated by tools (20.2%), photography (8.5%),
and entertainment (8.4%). The high proportion of utility apps makes this corpus
particularly relevant for our study, as these apps frequently necessitate broad An-
droid system permissions that are functionally justified yet vaguely articulated in
generic policy texts. Personal data sensitive categories like finance (3.3%) and
medical (0.6%) represent a much smaller fraction, reflecting their specialised,
rather than general-purpose, user base.
To systematically develop the PrivSTRUCT framework, we extracted a rep-
resentative subset of 750 policies (DSdev). To mitigate potential bias toward
the length, we applied a stratified sampling technique, guaranteeing a uniform
distribution by selecting exactly 150 policies from each 10KB length increment.
This subset was subsequently divided into 675 policies for training (DStrain) and
75 for testing (DStest). Following the finalisation of the PrivSTRUCT model,
we executed our at-scale empirical compliance analysis across the entire 3,756
policy corpus.

6
Silva B. et al.
Text chunking based on \n characters
chunk length ≤ 512 tokens
f"<{tag}>{heading}</{tag}>\n"
GPT-5 Reasoning heading list
Llama 3.1 8B Ins. heading list
Llama headings != GPT headings?
#Llama headings != 0?
Random Augmentation
First sentence as a {heading}
Yes
Chosen: GPT
Rejected: Llama
No
No
Yes
Fig. 3. Synthesising of the DPO dataset
3.2
Heading extraction
Modern HTML based privacy policies frequently rely on complex CSS and
JavaScript rather than a semantic Document Object Model (DOM) tree, there-
fore, developers rarely use standard HTML heading tags (e.g., <h1> through
<h6>) [6, 14, 25]. Using standard HTML parsers then inevitably reduce the doc-
ument to a flat text output, stripping away implicit hierarchical cues. To recover
this lost structure, we feed the flattened text file into a LLM tasked with identi-
fying and reconstructing the heading hierarchy. To determine the most efficient
approach for at-scale extraction, we compare the proprietary GPT-5 reasoning
(400k context window) via API against the open-weight Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
(128k context window), evaluating the latter for its potential cost and inference-
time advantages in local deployments. Across DSdev, we prompt both models to
generate a structural flow from the flat text, explicitly annotating each identified
heading with either a <main> or <sub> tag to indicate its hierarchical level (c.f.
Figure 3).
While both models performed similarly on the majority of policies, empir-
ical evaluations revealed three consistent failure modes for the Llama model:
(1) defaulting to uniform heading levels (all main or all sub), (2) misclassifying
entire paragraph sentences as headings, and (3) dropping existing headings en-
tirely. To address this without the extensive overhead of traditional supervised
fine-tuning, we employed Direct Preference Optimisation (DPO) [19] to align
the Llama model with GPT-5’s extraction quality. As depicted in Figure 3, we
curated a DPO dataset from DStrain by chunking them into 512-token segments
and isolating the instances where Llama’s baseline extraction mismatched GPT-
5’s output (71.4% of 8,418). To explicitly penalise Llama’s tendency to extract
full sentences (failure mode 2), among the missed-heading instances (28.9%) we
augmented 50% of them by supplying the segment’s first non-heading sentence as
a target rejected output. We use DStest to evaluate the DPO training, specifically
tuning the deviation penalty hyper-parameter, β, to optimise heading extraction
quality. To quantify this quality, we measure the "fitment" of headings across
the policy by calculating the median and inter-quartile range (IQR) of the text
length between identified headings. This distribution effectively flags structural
errors; for instance, a lower quartile approaching zero indicates the model is likely
misidentifying consecutive list items as sub-headings. We also track the average
number of headings identified per policy to ensure comprehensive extraction,
with detailed results discussed in Section 4.2.

PrivSTRUCT
7
3.3
Decoder based data item and purpose extraction
Literature highlights that embedding based models are not effective in seman-
tic text excerpt search due to the vector space noise [12]. Comparatively it is
straightforward for decoder models as a natural language understanding (NLU)
task [11, 25] to extract which segments represent data items and data purposes
for a given text chunk with 512 tokens at most. Given the nature of this task,
we directly use Llama3.1 8B instruct and represents outputs in a JSON format;
[{‘data′ : ‘data excerpt′, ‘purpose′ : ‘purpose excerpt′}, ...]
and we emphasise that we allow data or purpose keys to contain empty strings if
necessary. If we observe any empty purpose for a given data, we later on try to
map them globally with a suitable purpose discussed elsewhere, which is a key
novelty in this work.
To link globally-defined purposes, we create a link between isolated pur-
poses (i.e. no locally defined data item) listed under a data intention = Why?
or How Used? and isolated data items (i.e. no locally defined data purpose)
listed under a data intention = What?. An example can be observed in orange
colour dashed lines in Figure 2. If we observe isolated data items or purposes not
belonging to above mentioned data intentions, we still link them but as weak
global (floating) relationships. Note that the above mentioned two linkages
are pre-conditioned on data practice category and we do not match first party
collection data items with third party sharing data purposes (or vice versa).
3.4
Encoder based classifiers
Following the information extraction phase, we employ four fine-tuned PrivBERT
models to classify the extracted text into their respective categories. PrivBERT
is a privacy policy pre-trained RoBERTa based embedding model (c.f. Sub Sec-
tion 4.1). The fine-tuning of these modules for the downstream task of label
prediction was based on synthetic labels generated via GPT5 prompting for in-
formation extracted from the 750 privacy policies. This is similar to LLM boot-
strapped training of encoders discussed in [25]. We demonstrate the fine-tuning
performance in Table 1.
The classifiers for Data Item and Data Purpose operate on a straightforward
paradigm: they map each input text excerpt to a single class label using batched
inferencing. While the Data Practice and Data Intent classifiers could follow this
same approach, we hypothesise that encoder-based models benefit significantly
from additional structural context. To test this, we evaluate an input schema that
includes the section heading list within the prompt itself. Specifically, we for-
mat the input as “[CLS] target_heading [SEP] context_headings [SEP]”.
Due to PrivBERT’s 512-token input limit, we include only a subset of adjacent
headings (a ‘neighbourhood’) rather than the full list. We evaluate the impact of
this context-aware approach in Sub Section 4.3. A complete list of classification
labels given below.

8
Silva B. et al.
– Data Practices: First Party Collection/Use (c0), Third Party Sharing (c1), User Choice/Control
(c2), User Access, Edit and Deletion (c3), Introductory/Generic (c4), Policy Change (c5), Data
Security (c6), International and Specific Audience (c7), Practice Not Covered (c8), Data Re-
tention (c9), Privacy Contact Information (c10), and Do Not Track (c11).
– Data Intentions: What (i0), Why (i1), How-Collected (i2), How-Used (i3), When (i4), Other
(i5).
– Data Items (D): Name (d0), Email (d1), User account (d2), Address (d3), Phone (d4),
Race/Ethnicity (d5), Political/Religious (d6), Gender (d7), Financial (d8), Location (d9), Search
and Browsing history (d10), SMS/ Messages/ Call log (d11), Photos/Videos (d12), Audio/Music
(d13), Health/Fitness (d14), Contacts (d15), Calendar (d16), App performance/ App Activity
(d17), Device identifier (d18), Files/Documents (d19), Other Personal (d20), Generic information
(d21) and Negatives (d22).
– Data Purposes (P ): App Analytics (p0), Developer communication (p1), Fraud prevention
/ security and compliance (p2), Advertising or marketing (p3), Personalisation (p4), Account
management (p5), App functionality (p6), and Other (p7).
3.5
Metrics for Data Purpose Compliance
In this subsection, compliance indicates whether a given data item and its pur-
pose is disclosed in the data safety (DS) declarations and also correctly reflected
and described in the corresponding privacy policy (PP) text. More formally, for
a given {PP, DS} pair, we could observe the purpose compliance by comparing
the presence of each individual purpose for and when a given data item is agreed
as collected or shared among the pair. To establish a generalised landscape of
data purpose compliance (for all pairs of PP and DS instances), we define the
probability of observing a given purpose (p[i]) being well-disclosed for a given
data item (d[j]) as PW D(i, j) if and only if locally-defined.
PW D(i, j) = P(p[i] ∈(PP ∩DS) | d[j] ∈(PP ∩DS))
POS(i, j) represents the probability when a purpose p[i] that is locally de-
fined in the privacy policy is not observed in data safety, and we consider this
as the probability of purpose over-statement. Similarly PUS(i, j) which is the
probability of purpose under-statement defines that a purpose is mentioned in
the data safety but not in the privacy policy. (Note that the condition of purpose
non-existence or PNE(i, j) is not explicitly mentioned due to less significance but
can be obtained by 1 −PW D(i, j) −POS(i, j) −PUS(i, j)).
POS(i, j) = P(p[i] ∈(PP \ DS) | d[j] ∈(PP ∩DS))
PUS(i, j) = P(p[i] ∈(DS \ PP) | d[j] ∈(PP ∩DS))
Note: Probabilities are computed per data item d[j] of a given data practice
classification type. In the main context of the chapter, we are mostly interested
about data practices of PPs related with first party collection (c0) and third
party sharing (c1) which can be directly compared and contrasted against DS
declarations regarding compliance.
As we have discussed before, developers are inclined to not locally define data
item and data purpose relationships, and rather they tend to disclose via global
definitions. I.e. data items may be in bulk declared in one section related to
collection practices with relevant purposes declared elsewhere and vice versa for
sharing practices. As PrivSTRUCT is capable of extracting such relationships, it
is important to evaluate the compliance when taken these into consideration as

PrivSTRUCT
9
well. The delta contribution we receive when these globally-defined data-item
and purpose pairs are considered to the original PX is denoted as ∆. For example,
based on locally and globally defined data items and purposes, probability of
well-disclosed purposes being observed will be PW D + ∆PW D.
For us to globally match such purposes, it is expected that the developers
disclose data items inside a heading related to “WHAT" data intention (e.g.
What information do we collect from you?) and disclose the data purposes inside
a heading related to “WHY" data intention (e.g. Why do we collect information
from you?). However, developers could still disclose floating data items and data
purposes in other sections where the true intent is not clear. In this scenarios,
when the data practice category is strictly clear (i.e. collection or sharing), we
weakly global match such data items and data purposes and the additional
contribution we receive from this mapping to the compliance is indicated by ∆′.
3.6
Metrics for Data Purpose Dilution
Data Purpose Dilution refers to a phenomenon where the purpose for collecting
or sharing a specific data item, as declared in the DS declaration, does not
directly align with the purpose stated in the PP. Instead, the purpose in one
document (e.g., DS) is “diluted” or spread across a diverse set of other purposes
in the other document (e.g., PP) for the same data item, or vice versa. This
misalignment creates ambiguity and reduces clarity for end-users about why
their data is being processed.
To calculate the data purpose dilution matrix (DM) we deploy the logic
given by the following equation where we identify the disagreements between
the purposes of DS and PP for a given data item j and dilute them across other
purposes with disagreements. We use a 8x7 matrix as the ‘other’ purpose is non
existent for DS declaration for which it always follow p[7] ∈DS = 0,
DM(x, y) = (p[x] ∈PP \ DS) ∧(p[y] ∈DS \ PP)
We normalise each dilution matrix for a given data type for the summation of
all cells to be one for a given DS and PP pair. For observing the general landscape
of data dilution, we add all dilution matrices (per data item) and normalise
again. (Note: DM is different from the confusion matrix in traditional multi-class
classification problems, as there are no set ground truth and prediction values
for the problem we are discussing.) This metric helps us to identify which data
purposes for a given data item are consistently not-disclosed by the developers
while disclosing one or more unrelated data purposes.
4
Benchmarking PrivSTRUCT
To validate the efficacy of the PrivSTRUCT framework, we conduct a series
of benchmarking analysis starting with confirming the availability of structural
cues. Next the capabilities of DPO-trained models against state-of-the-art LLM

10
Silva B. et al.
Heading's Content
Text-Encoded
Heading's Content
Text-Encoded
Heading's Content
Text-Encoded
Introductory / Generic
First Party Collection
Third Party Sharing
What?
Why? / How Used?
How Gathered?
Other
0
100
50
25
75
Relative Length of Policy (%)
Frequency of occurence
Data Intentions
(Heading's content
based only)
Heading's Content
Text-Encoded
Heading's Content
Text-Encoded
Data Control Related
Demographic Related
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Data Practices
Aggregated
Data Practices
Fig. 4. Analysing 750 privacy policies based on semantic (text encoder) classification
versus structural (heading-content basis) labels
baselines and next, the classification performance of encoder-based modules un-
der varying context settings. Finally we compare PrivSTRUCT with PoliGra-
pher, a state-of-the-art knowledge graph based NLP tool for extracting privacy
policy information.
4.1
Confirming the availability of structural cues via headings
Meaningful label assignment via privacy policy paragraph classification is widely
addressed in literature, particularly, OPP-115 foundational dataset introduced
by Wilson et al. [30] in which legal experts annotated 23k segments belonging to
115 online privacy policies has become popular and widely adapted as in [23, 28,
14, 27, 26]. PrivBERT, a RoBERTa based encoder model that is pre-trained on
millions of privacy policies and fine-tuned on OPP-115 excels in this classification
task [27, 26]. Selection of the labels c0 to c11 in this work overlaps with this line
of prior work.
However, we rarely see a privacy policy written as a continuous block of text
that require individual paragraphs to be classified, rather, developers use section
headings to direct end-users to specific parts of the policy. In this benchmarking
experiment, we evaluate whether (a) section heading based (no paragraph context
given) labels align with (b) paragraph based (no section headings given) embedding
model generated labels. As there are no existing embedding models trained for
(a), we employ the GPT-5 reasoning model over DSdev to extract all the headings
from privacy policy text files and to assign each heading with two levels of labels:
data practice tags (i.e. c0 to c11) and data intention tags (i.e. i0 to i5). For (b)
we directly use the most confident label provided by the fine-tuned PrivBERT
classifier.
In the results depicted in Figure 4, x-axis represents the relative position
within the privacy policy, normalised on a scale of 0.0 (start of the document)
to 1.0 (end of the document). Comparing the distribution of labels derived from

PrivSTRUCT
11
Table 1. Macro average classification results of the four classifiers
Classifier
Feed
#Labels #Train #Test Pr
Re
F1
1. Data Practice single
12
21k
2795 0.86 0.86 0.86
multiple
12
21k
2795 0.96 0.96 0.96
2. Data Intention single
6
21k
2795 0.85 0.85 0.85
multiple
6
21k
2795 0.87 0.87 0.87
3. Data Items
N/A
23
74k
8271 0.87 0.83 0.85
4. Data Purpose N/A
8
51k
6320 0.93 0.92 0.93
text-encoding versus those derived purely from headings, a near-identical dis-
tributions across both methods are observed. This result highlights a common
distributional pattern across privacy policies. The initial 10% of the policy length
is typically introductory or generic. Next, nearly 40% of the document length is
dedicated to First Party Collection. In this segment, we observed a relative agree-
ment of 98.65% between the heading-based and text-embedding based methods.
The subsequent 25% of the document predominantly details Third Party Shar-
ing, with a method agreement of 91.65%. Data Control practices (an aggregation
of user choice, access / edit / deletion, retention, and security) and Demographic
explanations (e.g., target regions like EU or US) are predominantly located in
the final quartile. Proven the hypothesis on alignment is valid, finally, the GPT-5
based data-intention-tags reveal that sections specific to “why” data is collected
or “how” it is used are structurally distinct from sections describing “what” data
is collected. This confirms that developers implicitly structure policies with sep-
arated intents, a cue that can be leveraged for more granular analysis, an im-
portant feature not utilised before in literature.
4.2
DPO for heading extraction
Based on the experiments outlined in Section 3.2, a hyperparameter selection ex-
periment yielded β = 0.4 as the optimal value where the DPO trained Llama3.1
model provided highest quality of outputs related to heading structure extrac-
tion. We refer the readers to Appendix A.1 for detailed results on this hyperpa-
rameter selection and further explanations. A manual study over DStest further
confirmed preference for DPO-Llama3.1 model improved to 42.7%, a perfor-
mance that is highly competitive with respect to the proprietary GPT-5 (50.7%)
and baseline Llama3.1 (6.6%). It confirms that we can reliably substitute a lo-
cally hosted decoder model for heading extraction with no API costs and much
faster inference times (c.f. Appendix Figure 9 - d). This preference optimised
model was then used for generating empirical results for full dataset.
4.3
Encoder based classifiers
Text classification using encoder models is well-established and proven efficient
for privacy policy analysis [27, 26]. Table 1 presents the macro-average scores

12
Silva B. et al.
0
20
Policy Index
10
30
50
40
60
70
50
100
150
200
0
250
Unique Identifications
PrivSTRUCT - data items
PrivSTRUCT - purposes
PoliGRAPH - data items
PoliGRAPH - purposes
0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
40-50
Policy size in KB
Fig. 5. Comparison with PoliGraph
for the four classifiers utilised in PrivSTRUCT. The column #Train indicates
how many samples we used to fine tune each model and we followed LLM boot-
strapped training, where the training labels are generated via GPT5 models.
This stage allows us to use efficient encoder models (∼500M parameters in to-
tal) for the label generation task without relying on locally hosted much larger
Llama3.1 models or API based generative models, still providing comparable
performance.
We specifically highlight the ablation studies for the data practice and data
intention classifiers (rows 1 and 2 in Table 1). Here, ‘feed’ denotes whether the
model received only the target heading (single) or the target heading accom-
panied by its surrounding neighbourhood of headings (multiple). The multiple
setting enables the model’s self-attention mechanism to leverage the structural
context of the document better. While increasing the MAX_LENGTH param-
eter to accommodate this context increases computational cost, it yields signifi-
cant gains: we observed a substantial 10 percentage point improvement in
F1 score for data practice classification (e.g., distinguishing first party collection
from third party sharing). However, the improvement for developer intent clas-
sification was marginal, showing only a 2 percentage point increase indicating
the isolated headings still contain sufficient information to classify based on data
practice intention.
4.4
PrivSTRUCT versus PoliGraph
To benchmark our framework, we employ the open-source PoliGrapher NLP tool
[9] to parse the 75 privacy policies in our test dataset (DStest), comparing its
extraction of data items and purposes against PrivSTRUCT. Figure 5 illustrates
the comparative yield of unique item and purpose identifications.
Notably, the PoliGrapher tool failed to parse 6 of the 75 policies (8%, all
exceeding 25KB in size). While PrivSTRUCT successfully processed the entire
dataset, we restrict the following comparative analysis strictly to the 69 policies
successfully processed by both frameworks to ensure an equitable baseline and
meaningful improvement metrics. In terms of data items, PrivSTRUCT identifies
an average of 79.6 unique mentions per policy (accounting for multiple items em-

PrivSTRUCT
13
Section Heading Label:
Data Items :
Data Practice
Data Intent
collect*
collect*
n/a
n/a
Data Purposes:
Must be locally
defined. 
Therefore data
intent is
irrelevant
Section Heading Label:
Data Items :
Data Practice
Data Intent
collect*
collect*
What
Why/How-Used
Data Purposes:
Globally
Defined
Mapping
Required
Section Heading Label:
Data Items :
Data Practice
Data Intent
collect*
collect*
Other
Other
Data Purposes:
Data items
and purposes
not linked by
developer
* When calculating purpose compliance related to "Data Collection". For the "Data Sharing" compliance metrics, * should be "share"
Fig. 6. Locally-defined, globally-defined or un-defined/floating purposes
bedded within single sentence excerpts), whereas PoliGrapher averages only 38.1
(a 52.1% reduction). The disparity is even more pronounced for data purposes:
PrivSTRUCT extracts an average of 92.8 unique purpose statements per policy,
compared to PoliGrapher’s 10.1 (an 89.1% reduction). Furthermore, upon map-
ping these extracted excerpts to standardised purpose categories, PrivSTRUCT
identifies an average of 2.9 additional distinct purpose categories per policy,
demonstrating a significantly richer information yield.
5
Results
For discussing the results of the large scale analysis of 3,756 privacy policy doc-
uments, we follow the metrics defined in Sub-sections 3.5 and 3.6. We critically
evaluate purpose compliance landscape based on each of the privacy policy (PP)
and the data safety (DS) declaration of the most popular app representing the
privacy policy. Given that both forms of disclosures (PP and DS) are developer-
self declared, our expectation as well as with any end-user is to observe an
explanatory text in the PP regarding the data purposes declared in DS. This
is also enforced by regulatory frameworks and app market operator mandates
under required consistency. We observed that, despite the availability of 22 data
item categories, majority of them were very sparse; for example, we did not
or rarely observed any mention of d[5]-race/ethnicity and d[6]-political/religious
categories. For the rest of this section, we discuss the purpose compliance with
respect to eight high-frequent data item categories.
Figure 6 summarises how developers define data purposes compared to the
data items in their disclosures. PX represents locally-defined purpose statements
where it is irrelevant to specifically consider developer data intentions. They
could be related to either first party collection or third party sharing based on the
data practice classification label. ∆represents globally-defined purposes where
an intention based mapping is required to link ‘what’ data items are disclosed
and ‘why’ these data items are used. ∆′ represents floating data purposes that
are observed elsewhere in data intention classifications, yet still belonging to the
same data practice category.
5.1
Well-and not so well-disclosed Purposes
As shown in Figure 7, we can observe that having a well-disclosed purpose for a
given data item is not uniform (i.e., due to hot spots if we go through column-
wise in the row PW D for each data item). Name, email, and user account have

14
Silva B. et al.
1.0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
+0.05
-0.05
0.0
+0.10
-0.10
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
Data Collection
Name
Email
User Account
Financial
Location
App Perfor. &
Activity
Device IDs
Generic
Information
0-App Analytics  1-Dev.Communication  2-Fraud prevent/Security/Compliance  3-Advertising/Marketing  
4-Personalisation  5-Account Management  6-App Functionality  7-Other
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
Data Sharing
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7
Fig. 7. Results for Purpose Compliance
Table 2. Average probability of occurrence for purpose well-disclosure(WD), under-
statement(US) and over-statement(OS) for eight frequently used data item categories.
User
App Device Gen- Avg.
Name Email Acct. Finc. Loc. Acct.
IDs
-eric
PX
∆
∆′
PW D 0.111 0.154 0.159 0.122 0.143 0.144 0.135 0.187 0.144 +0.017 +0.026 (+18.0%)
collect PUS
0.214 0.230 0.278 0.253 0.196 0.143 0.165 0.137 0.202 -0.016
-0.026 (-12.9%)
POS
0.222 0.204 0.190 0.199 0.214 0.264 0.244 0.347 0.235 +0.028 +0.048 (+20.4%)
PW D 0.073 0.099 0.055 0.063 0.097 0.080 0.099 0.131 0.087 +0.001
+0.006 (+6.9%)
share
PUS
0.219 0.250 0.301 0.199 0.198 0.123 0.172 0.253 0.214 -0.001
-0.009 (-4.2%)
POS
0.172 0.188 0.172 0.202 0.125 0.188 0.154 0.288 0.186 +0.003
+0.018 (+9.7%)
a higher probability of being well-disclosed when collected for account manage-
ment. Similarly, financial information is likely well-disclosed for fraud preven-
tion/security and compliance and location, app performance, and app activity,
device identifiers for app analytics. All data items have a higher probability of
being well-disclosed for app functionality. When location and device identifier
are shared with third parties for advertising, it is likely to be well-disclosed.
Table 2 quantitatively discuss the results based on each data when averaged
across all data purpose categories. The probability of observing well-disclosed
and locally-defined purposes among the selected data items remains low at
14.4% for when collected and only 8.7% when shared. Comparatively the purpose
over-statement within the policy text remains quite high, approximately with
twice the probability. Note that the three probability values in each column
do not add up to 1 as we do not show purpose non-existence (which simply
dictates that a data item and data purpose are unlikely to be linked via developer
disclosures) here.
Both in the figure and in table, we show the change to the original proba-
bilities as soon as we include globally-defined purposes as ∆. In the figure,
blue shades represent the increase of the respective probabilities with red shades
representing decreases. In the results, we also depict unlinked/floating data
purpose compliance which are easy to be missed by end-users as the section
headings do not properly disclose the developer intention with such data prac-

PrivSTRUCT
15
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
Name
Email
User Account
Financial
Location
App Perfor. & Activity
Device IDs
Generic Information
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
0   1   2   3   4   5   6
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7
0-App Analytics  1-Dev.Communication  2-Fraud prevent/Security/Compliance  3-Advertising/Marketing  4-Personalisation  5-Account Management  6-App Functionality  7-Other
DS
PP
Data Collect
Data Share
0.0
1.0
0.5
0.75
0.25
Fig. 8. Results for Purpose Dilution
tices. We denote these contributions via ∆′. As we identify more and more data-
item linkages that are globally mapped, well-disclosures and over-statements
tend to go higher while reducing the under-statements. More specifically, aver-
age PW D|collect improves by 18.0% and average PW D|share does not increase as
much; only by 6.9%. This indicates that developers are less likely to emphasise
on data they share with third parties, and rather tend to explain their collection
usages. This is more apparent with nearly 40% of a privacy policy is used for
describing collection details and only 25% for sharing details in average. Qual-
itatively we observed that policies tend to disclose redirections (e.g. ‘Refer to
the third-party website’s privacy policy for ...’) instead of clearly indicating pur-
poses. This raises a critical question for end-user privacy whether is it realistic
for someone to read all such policies when many apps use third party services for
analytics and advertising. The highest probability of understatement is observed
with user account data being shared with third-parties.
5.2
Purpose Dilution
Figure 8 represents the asymmetric purpose dilution matrices for the selected
data items. As the data safety does not contain other category, it is omitted from
the x-axis of all matrices. However, ambiguous PP purposes could still be diluted
across DS declarations. A significant purpose dilution can be characterised by
horizontal or vertical lines that stand out in these matrices and hot spots are
created when they intersect.
A primary observation is that Financial, location, app performance/activity,
device identifier data collected or shared for app analytics is often diluted across
other privacy policy purposes. A qualitative explanation is majority of privacy
policies are not optimised based on app based services, rather they are optimised
with online-services and traditional privacy policy architectures in mind. We
argue that privacy policies representing mobile apps should require modifications
or sections specifically mentioning mobile app based data practices. We also
observe that device identifier data collected or shared for advertising is diluted
as personalisation, fraud prevention, security or compliance, or other purposes
in the privacy policy. User email when shared for advertising and developer

16
Silva B. et al.
communication is considerably diluted as account management which is a serious
privacy concern for end-users. Financial details when shared for analytics are
more easier to be misinterpreted as shared for fraud prevention and security and
compliance purposes. Our tailored compliance metrics allow this finer grained
evaluation and simply observing the hot spots in the figure, we could deduce
that purpose dilution is more prominent among the data items that are shared
with third parties. This again reinforces the discussion in Sub Section 5.1 that
more clearer explanations are required about third party data sharing within the
privacy policies themselves.
6
Conclusion
We presented PrivSTRUCT, a structure-aware framework designed to uncover
the complex dependencies between data items and purposes in mobile app pri-
vacy policies. By moving beyond traditional flat-text analysis, we demonstrated
that leveraging the hierarchical structure; specifically through the extraction and
classification of section headings is essential for accurate interpretation, resolv-
ing a major limitation in prior work. Our methodological contributions include a
hybrid architecture that pairs efficient encoder-based classifiers with a decoder-
based information extractors. We showed that this approach not only enables
cost-effective, locally hosted inference but also significantly outperforms exist-
ing state-of-the-art tools like PoliGraph, in average identifying at least twice (or
greater) as many data item or purpose excerpts in our benchmark comparisons.
By leveraging robust extraction of data practices, items, and purposes from
privacy policies, we characterise the disclosure landscape of popular apps in the
Google Play Store. We uncover the relationships between globally defined pur-
poses and specific data items. Our analysis reveals that, compared to relying
solely on locally defined purposes, the probability of developers overstating pur-
poses is 20.4% higher for first-party collection and 9.7% higher for third-party
sharing. We attribute this to developers relying on ‘global’ purpose definitions
that are difficult for end-users to parse at a glance. Alarmingly, this encourages
blanket consenting, as the probability of adequate purpose disclosure remains
critically low.
Most critically, our analysis of “Purpose Dilution” highlights that third-party
data sharing remains the most opaque aspect of the ecosystem. We observed
that highly sensitive data flows, such as the sharing of financial information or
device identifiers for advertising, are frequently diluted into unrelated categories
like “Fraud Prevention” or generic “Other” clauses within the policy text. This
misalignment suggests that despite the introduction of simplified Data Safety
labels, the underlying legal documents remain a barrier to true transparency.