An AI Agent Execution Environment
to Safeguard User Data
Robert Stanley
rsta@ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Avi Verma
averma13@ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Lillian Tsai
tslilyai@google.com
Google
Konstantinos Kallas
kkallas@ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Sam Kumar
samkumar@cs.ucla.edu
University of California, Los Angeles
Abstract
AI agents promise to serve as general-purpose personal as-
sistants for their users, which requires them to have access
to private user data (e.g., personal and financial information).
This poses a serious risk to security and privacy. Adversaries
may attack the AI model (e.g., via prompt injection) to exfil-
trate user data. Furthermore, sharing private data with an
AI agent requires users to trust a potentially unscrupulous
or compromised AI model provider with their private data.
This paper presents GAAP (Guaranteed Accounting for
Agent Privacy), an execution environment for AI agents that
guarantees confidentiality for private user data. Through
dynamic and directed user prompts, GAAP collects permis-
sion specifications from users describing how their private
data may be shared, and GAAP enforces that the agent’s
disclosures of private user data, including disclosures to the
AI model and its provider, comply with these specifications.
Crucially, GAAP provides this guarantee deterministically,
without trusting the agent with private user data, and without
requiring any AI model or the user prompt to be free of attacks.
GAAP enforces the user’s permission specification by
tracking how the AI agent accesses and uses private user
data. It augments Information Flow Control with novel per-
sistent data stores and annotations that enable it to track
the flow of private information both across execution steps
within a single task, and also over multiple tasks separated
in time. Our evaluation confirms that GAAP blocks all data
disclosure attacks, including those that make other state-
of-the-art systems disclose private user data to untrusted
parties, without a significant impact on agent utility.
1
Introduction
Recent advances in agentic AI systems are fundamentally
changing how users interact with software systems. Given
only a natural-language prompt from the user, an AI agent
can invoke external tools (e.g., search engines, calculators,
and web APIs [46, 57, 79]) to autonomously complete real-
world tasks (e.g., booking travel, purchasing food, and inter-
acting with SaaS platforms [1, 34, 71]) with minimal human
intervention. This capability is further supported by a grow-
ing ecosystem of AI-tool interfaces, including plugin frame-
works and standards for structured tool invocation [3, 48].
However, executing such tasks often requires agents to
have access to private user data, such as credentials, financial
data, and personally identifiable information (PII). These
agents then embed this data, or derivatives of this data, in
the tool calls they make to accomplish the task. For example,
in order to send emails, purchase items, or check in to a
flight on a user’s behalf, an agent needs access to the user’s
e-mail credentials, payment information, and date of birth.
As a result, agentic systems necessarily operate over contexts
that combine user intent, private data, and external actions.
This combination introduces significant risks for security
and privacy. Recent work has shown that LLM-based agents
are vulnerable to prompt injections and related attacks that
manipulate their behavior [8, 20, 41, 47, 53, 84]. Users may
also want to avoid sharing their private data with the AI
model provider, due to fear of its misuse or that the model
provider may be compromised [15, 42]. And even in the
absence of an attack, AI agents may hallucinate or take mis-
taken actions [37, 40] leading to unwanted data disclosure.
To address this problem, we develop GAAP (Guaranteed
Accounting for Agent Privacy), an execution environment
for AI agents that provides confidentiality guarantees for
private user data, preventing unintended disclosures to un-
trusted parties through tool calls. GAAP enforces strong,
fully deterministic confidentiality guarantees by asking the
agent to generate a code artifact and performing an informa-
tion flow control analysis (IFC) on this artifact. In designing
GAAP, our vision is to achieve deterministic privacy guaran-
tees on data disclosures without relying on the user’s prompts
to the agent or the AI model to be correct or free of attacks. To
fulfill this vision, GAAP must address three key challenges.
First, GAAP considers the user prompt, model provider,
and model context to be fully untrusted, so these components
cannot hold private user data or contain the user’s permis-
sion policies. To address this challenge, GAAP encapsulates
user private data and permission policies in a private data
database and a permission database, and allows only the user
1
arXiv:2604.19657v1 [cs.CR] 21 Apr 2026

to access and modify these items through direct interactions
(blocking any agent access). This allows GAAP to provide
strong confidentiality guarantees without any trust in the
prompt, context, or LLM model.
Second, realistic usage of agents includes long sequences
of interactions with the model, either through iterative task
completion, or across multiple tasks done by the same user,
or even across tasks done by different users in the system. All
of these interactions might perform tool calls that might lead
to indirect private data flows across tasks, e.g., when data
shared in a tool call is returned to the user by a subsequent
call to the same tool for a different task. To address this prob-
lem, GAAP introduces a disclosure log that records all prior
disclosures of private data to external services (e.g., sharing
a passport number with an airline service), allowing it to
track and prevent unintended data flows that occur across
tasks and tool calls. This log can also be used for compliance
in accordance to government and other regulations.
Finally, real-world agents use a vast ecosystem of exter-
nal tools (e.g., as Model Context Protocol (MCP) services).
Each of tool is associated with different external parties and
allows different flows of data. For example, an airline service
might return the user’s full name and passport number, but
it would never send back the password for the user’s account.
To address this, GAAP develops an annotation framework
that can be used to describe the associated parties and data
flows for each method of each MCP service. The goal is that
the framework will be used to develop an open-source crowd-
sourced library of annotations for MCP services that can be
publicly analyzed and vetted and that users can import to use
with GAAP. We provide written annotations for 10 diverse
MCP servers to bootstrap this process.
We implement GAAP and evaluate it using a collection
of tasks and attacks drawn from various sources in the lit-
erature and practice. Our evaluation confirms that it pro-
vides deterministic privacy guarantees, and that it blocks
all data disclosure attacks, including those that succeed in
making other state-of-the-art systems disclose private data
to untrusted parties. Furthermore, GAAP provides strong
privacy guarantees without negatively impact the agent’s
utility, allowing it to successfully complete tasks with rates
comparable to other state-of-the-art and less private systems.
In summary, GAAP makes the following contributions:
1. A system architecture for deterministic confidentiality
guarantees in a realistic setting where the user’s prompts,
private data, agent context, and AI model may be compro-
mised (§3).
2. A private data DB and a permission DB that encapsulate
user private data and permission policies, restricting the
agent LLM’s data access (§4.2,4.3).
3. A disclosure log that stores all data disclosures to support
indirect data flows across tasks and tool calls (§4.5).
4. An annotation framework that enables high precision
descriptions of the parties and flows associated with each
external tool (§4.4).
We start by surveying related work and how existing sys-
tems fail to address critical aspects of real-world agents in
§2. We then present an overview of GAAP in §3. Because
GAAP’s main components are interrelated, we explain them
in two passes: a high-level “overview” pass in §3.3, and a de-
tailed pass in §4. Finally, we present GAAP’s implementation
(§5), an evaluation of GAAP (§6), and a discussion (§7).
We plan to release GAAP as open-source software.
2
Related Work
GAAP is one of many privacy-providing systems for agents,
and provides an approach to privacy that differs in its fea-
tures, threat model, and goal. Table 1 highlights the differ-
ences between GAAP and various other categories of sys-
tems; we break these down further below.
Information Flow Control (IFC) Systems. Existing IFC
systems [11, 12, 29, 31, 60, 76, 82] utilize mechanisms similar
to GAAP’s IFC core (§3); all use techniques from prior IFC
systems [16, 45, 81]. Like GAAP, some of these systems [12,
31] generate code artifacts to perform the intended task.
These systems differ from GAAP in three key ways.
First, these systems aim to preserve control-flow integrity
by preventing execution of high-risk actions induced by
untrusted data manipulating the control flow. This requires
a trusted mechanism to label data as untrusted, and a trusted
LLM that executes correctly unless exposed to untrusted
data. By contrast, GAAP operates in a threat model (§3.2)
where no data is considered trusted and no trusted labels are
required, thus avoiding any assumption of trust in the user’s
input or context, which can be compromised [8, 14, 41, 62]).
In this threat model, GAAP provides confidentiality but not
integrity.
Second, GAAP builds the user’s privacy policy over time;
these systems instead assume a prewritten, static disclosure
policy set by the developer over user data. Prudentia [29]
allows users to dynamically override a denied disclosure, but
does not persist this decision by updating the policy.
Third, GAAP tracks prior disclosures and taints within
and across task executions; by contrast, these systems either
track taints only through a “single-shot” piece of code [12] or
through a single task execution [11, 29, 76]. Because GAAP’s
threat model allows untrusted data for code generation,
GAAP can track taints through a “multi-shot” execution
(where the agent generates code during task execution based
on intermediate results), whereas a system like CaMeL can-
not. Unlike IFC systems like Fides and Prudentia, GAAP
reasons about transitive and indirect data disclosures across
tasks, remembering prior disclosures to external entities.
2

Feature
IFC on Code
Artifact
(CaMeL)
IFC
(Fides)
IFC w/User
Overrides
(Prudentia)
Trusted
Policy
(Conseca)
Derived
Policy
(Miniscope)
Model-based
Threat
Detection
GAAP
(f1) Data disclosure guarantees
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
(f2) Doesn’t need trust labels
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
(f3) No trusted LLM
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
(f4) Dynamic, user-defined
data disclosure permissions
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
(f5) Policies last across tasks
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
(f6) Supports multi-shot
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Table 1. Features of systems providing privacy for agentic AI (example systems in parentheses). Like other IFC systems, GAAP
provides data disclosure guarantees (f1), and does so deterministically (unlike model-generated policies
). GAAP does not
rely on trusted data and trust labels (f2), unlike existing IFC and policy systems that aim for integrity and need to ensure only
trusted data can influence control flow. Furthermore, GAAP’s confidentiality guarantees do not rely on any trusted model (f3),
unlike systems that need trusted models to generate code or policies to restrict control flow. GAAP also builds the user’s data
disclosure policy over time (f4), persists it across tasks (f5), and supports multi-shot executions (taints across LLM calls) (f6).
GAAP’s techniques can be combined with these systems
for control-flow integrity to provide dynamic, persistent
disclosure policies and enforcement.
Some works focus on reducing overtainting when in-
voking an LLM (required for multi-shot tasks) via (conserva-
tively) redacting parts of the context that are likely unused
for the next task [82] or propagating only data labels “in-
fluential” to the LLM’s output [60]. GAAP can use these
methods to reduce overtainting during multi-shot tasks.
Trusted Policy-Based Defenses. Approaches including
IsolateGPT [77], Conseca [65], CeLLMate [38], and others [5,
12, 22, 38, 49, 51, 54, 63, 67, 70] aim to guarantee both confi-
dentiality and integrity against malicious or confused agents
compromised by e.g., prompt injection, model poisoning, or
malicious system prompts. They operate by running a variant
of “security monitor” that checks either the agent’s inputs
(e.g., retrieved user data) or outputs (e.g., tool calls) against
a (static or contextually-generated) policy.1 Approaches us-
ing LLMs for policy generation [7, 12, 31, 65, 76] follow the
dual-LLM pattern [74] to ensure the security monitor is itself
not comprised by any untrusted inputs. By contrast, GAAP
aims to only guarantee data confidentiality and operates in
a threat model where the agent and all inputs may be un-
trusted. These systems can similarly be combined to provide
both strong confidentiality and integrity guarantees.
Deriving User Policies. Miniscope [83] computes the min-
imal set of OAuth scopes to accomplish a task, and, like
GAAP, asks the user for (temporary or permanent) approval
of these tools. GAAP focuses on enforcing privacy policies
for fine-grained disclosures, an orthogonal task to enforcing
1This includes IFC approaches which produce code artifacts that constrain
control flow, thus acting as policies [12, 31].
tool permission scopes. Other systems look to derive poli-
cies based off of user inputs or historical data, e.g., aiming
to simulate human privacy decisions or find user-friendly
ways to discover a user’s disclosure policy [17, 19, 21, 33].
GAAP can be combined with these systems to provide strong
enforcement of user disclosure decisions.
Model-based Threat Detection. Many works use models
to detect attacks [2, 24, 26, 75], or train or prompt mod-
els to be robust to malicious inputs via e.g., spotlighting or
prompt “delimiters” [6, 23, 69, 73, 80]. Other systems rely
on a LLM-as-a-judge to identify threats to security and pri-
vacy [7, 9, 10, 18, 27, 32, 59], or a policy-generating LLM
exposed to untrusted context (e.g., Progent-LLM [58]). Be-
cause these solutions expose the LLM to untrusted inputs
(potentially containing prompt injection), they can reduce
the success rate of attacks but not eliminate them entirely [47];
by contrast, GAAP eliminates all data disclosure attacks un-
der its threat model. Recent work to reduce this exposure [25]
coerces inputs to structured datatypes (at potential cost to
utility). Unlike GAAP, these solutions all assume trust in the
model and the model’s training.
Private Memory Systems. Recent works on private mem-
ory for personal AI [4, 28, 64] address the problem of keeping
user data—including queries and documents—private, but
only during search and model serving. Their protection does
not extend to agentic use cases that exhibit tool use with
external side effects, which GAAP handles. GAAP and pri-
vate memory are complementary and could potentially be
used together: private memory can protect any data and
queries the user sends to the agent from exposure during
model search and inference. Meanwhile, GAAP can ensure
3

(1) User prompt
Agent
External 
APIs
GAAP 
datastore
(2) Data lookup
GAAP Policy 
Evaluator
(4) Allows (or 
denies) call
(3) API Call 
check by GAAP
(5) Asks user for 
policy decision
User
Figure 1. One step of agent execution with GAAP. GAAP
traces data retrieved by data lookups as the agent executes
the user’s prompt (1-2). When the agent makes an API call
(3), potentially disclosing this data, GAAP ensures that all
disclosures abide by the current user policy (4), or asks the
user if no such policy exists (5).
any user data disclosures through tool use comply with the
user’s policy.
3
System Overview
We first describe GAAP’s system model and workflow (§3.1).
We then describe GAAP’s threat model and security guaran-
tees (§3.2). Because GAAP’s main components are interre-
lated, we explain them in two passes: a high-level “overview
pass” below in §3.3, and a detailed pass in §4.
3.1
System Model
We consider a system model where a user issues prompts
to an AI agent, asking it to perform a variety of tasks, such
as booking a flight, purchasing an item online, or e-mailing
a file to a colleague. The agent takes actions in response to
the user’s prompts, issuing calls to external services (remote
or local MCP servers), to e.g., send an email, or access a file.
The agent remembers context across multiple prompts.
To carry out these tasks, the agent needs access to the
user’s sensitive data (e.g., payment information, email cre-
dentials, personal information, etc.), and this is where GAAP
comes into play. GAAP is an execution environment for the
agent that aims to ensure that all disclosures of private user
data to external services are consistent with the user’s per-
mission specifications. It intercepts the agent’s requests to
external services, and denies requests that would disclose
private user data in ways that the user has not permitted.
Even though AI models (e.g., GPT, Claude, etc.) are often
hosted remotely, the agent (e.g., Claude Code, Copilot, etc.)
often executes locally in the user’s workspace, with access to
local resources like the file system. GAAP should be deployed
in the environment where the agent executes, which we
envision will often be on the user’s local machine. We briefly
consider alternative deployment models in §3.2.
3.1.1
User Workflow. As shown in Figure 1, agent opera-
tion with GAAP proceeds as follows:
1. The user issues a prompt to the agent, which runs in
GAAP’s execution environment.
2. The agent retrieves some private data by issuing an API
call (to an MCP server) such as get_file or by querying
user data stored internally by GAAP itself. GAAP tracks
these accesses throughout agent execution.
3. When the agent attempts to make an API call to an ex-
ternal service, GAAP intercepts and evaluates this call to
check for disclosures of user data.
4. If GAAP can conclusively determine whether the API call
is permissible or not based on its current understanding of
the user’s policy (i.e., which user data items can be shared
with which parties), it accordingly either allows or denies
the API call, without prompting the user.
5. If GAAP cannot conclusively determine this, then it pauses
the agent’s execution, prompts the user with information
about the disclosure, and asks the user if it should be al-
lowed (e.g., “Should the contents of file2.txt be sent
via e-mail to joe.smith@email.com?”). GAAP saves this
decision (i.e., the permission specification) to automatically
evaluate future disclosures (§3.3.3) and skips prompting
the user for future disclosures of that data item to the
particular external party. GAAP exposes an API for users
to update their permission specifications if they wish.
3.1.2
Private Data Lookups and Tracking. To perform
a task, the agent needs access to private user data. The agent
can access private data in two ways: (1) lookups in GAAP’s
internal store, and (2) calls to external APIs.
First, GAAP maintains an internal data store (described
more fully in §3.3.2) containing private user data that the
agent can access. At runtime, the agent identifies any data
items that it needs that are not already in GAAP’s internal
store (e.g., user’s date of birth), and prompts the user to add
those values to GAAP’s internal store. Users may also add
data values proactively, in anticipation of the agent need-
ing them for a future prompt; however, we expect users to
generally rely on runtime prompts as described above.
Second, some user data may exist outside of GAAP’s data
store, in external services (e.g., file system, e-mail, or web
services) so GAAP conservatively considers the outputs of
API calls as containing private data. For example, the user
may have shared data with an external service (e.g., a health
portal) without using GAAP, or external services may share
data among each other. APIs can be annotated using GAAP’s
annotation framework (described more fully in §3.3.5) to
indicate cases where the outputs of API calls do not contain
private data (e.g., APIs for searching public information).
To enforce the user’s permission specifications, GAAP
tracks how the agent accesses and uses private user data.
GAAP achieves this by (1) requiring the agent to generate
4

code that performs the desired task, and (2) applying Infor-
mation Flow Control to determine how that code accesses
and discloses private user data. §3.3.1 explains this further.
3.1.3
User Prompts. GAAP considers the user’s prompt
“public” and shared directly with the agent. Therefore, GAAP
expects the user to avoid including their private data in their
prompt. Instead, the user writes their prompts using the keys
(names) of data items rather than the values, and the agent
looks up the corresponding values at runtime via GAAP’s
execution environment. For example, instead of prompting
the agent with “As a 20-year-old, am I eligible to vote in
the United States?”, the user should prompt the agent with
“Given my age, am I eligible to vote in the United States?” At
runtime, the agent looks up the user’s date of birth (§3.1.2).
3.2
Threat Model and Security Guarantees
Definitions. A data disclosure is a transfer of user data (from
either GAAP’s own storage, or the output of an API call) to
an external party (through a call to an external service).
For example, data disclosures include (1) sending an e-mail
containing data from a local file, (2) filling out an online web
form using data from an e-mail, and (3) logging in to a web
service using credentials that the user gave to GAAP.
A private data type is a category of data whose handling
should be subject to the user’s policy specification; examples
include name, date of birth, SSN, email address, and email
password. We then define private user data, or simply user
data, to mean any piece of data that contains (or is tainted
by or otherwise derived from) at least one private data type;
examples include a date of birth “1/1/2000”, or a string con-
taining multiple private data types “My name is J. Doe and
I was born on 1/1/2000”. GAAP’s focus is controlling dis-
closures of private user data to external parties, namely an
entity that can be precisely identified, e.g., an organization
domain name, a URL, an email address, or an external service.
Finally, a permission specification is an allow/deny flag for a
pair of a private data name and an external party.
Security guarantees. We consider a malicious adversary
who observes the inputs (prompt and context) to the AI
model, controls the outputs (text, code, and tool calls) of the
AI model, and controls some or all of the external services
with which the agent may interact. GAAP guarantees that
such an adversary learns no private user data, except for
data that the user has authorized, by their permission specifi-
cations, to be disclosed to the AI model provider or external
services under the adversary’s control. In this way, GAAP
protects the confidentiality of private user data.
Basically, GAAP guarantees that the agent can only dis-
close data to external services in ways that are consistent
with the user’s permission specifications. These guarantees
also apply for disclosures to the AI model provider (i.e., the
AI model provider is itself modeled as an “external service”).
GAAP provides this security guarantee reliably and deter-
ministically; it does not rely on an AI model to detect and
prevent unintended data disclosures. Thus, it totally elimi-
nates unintended data disclosures in the above threat model.
Discussion. Our threat model (i.e., malicious adversary in
the previous paragraph) covers attacks including agent hallu-
cinations, malicious model providers, model poisoning, and
untrusted tool providers. In particular, it includes prompt
injections [30, 36, 52], which OWASP listed as the #1 security
threat for LLMs in 2025 [50]. For example, a prompt injection
could happen because the user authorizes disclosure of data
containing a prompt injection attack to the AI agent; our
system ensures that, even if the agent is attacked, it can only
disclose user data according to the user’s explicit permission
specifications.
GAAP achieves its security guarantee without relying on
the correctness or trustworthiness of the agent, user prompts,
or private user data. Removing trust from the AI agent and
its provider are particularly relevant if the user runs GAAP
on their local machine, as they may be more comfortable
entrusting their data to GAAP than to a remote AI agent
provider. In cases where an AI model provider offers a hosted
agent, the provider might deploy GAAP in their own envi-
ronment (e.g., in the cloud). In such cases, GAAP still brings
value by protecting against attacks on the model (e.g., prompt
injections).
Existing work on private AI memory [4, 28, 64] safeguards
user data from an adversary who controls the AI model
serving infrastructure. Private AI memory does not protect
against an agent erroneously disclosing user data to external
services via API calls. In contrast, GAAP does protect against
disclosures to external services, captured by our threat model
where the adversary controls not only the AI model, but also
some external services.
Non-guarantees. GAAP does not provide guarantees for
user data that is included directly in the agent prompt (hence
the usage guidelines in §3.1.3). Furthermore, in addition to
learning the user prompts, the adversary also learns metadata
about the prompts, e.g., the timing and order in which the
user issued them. Finally, GAAP only prevents the agent
from violating the confidentiality of user data, and does not
aim to preserve data or system integrity. For example, GAAP
will not prevent changes in control flow caused by prompt
injections that do not lead to unintended data disclosure.
3.3
Architectural Overview
GAAP consists of an information flow control (IFC) core aug-
mented with four novel components: a private data DB, a
permission DB, a disclosure log, and an annotation frame-
work. Figure 2 demonstrates how GAAP uses these compo-
nents to enforce and update user permissions. The agent’s
interaction is mediated through the Model Context Protocol
(MCP) [3, 44, 55], where each service has an MCP Server
5

Code 
Artifact
User
User prompt +
Agent context +
GAAP system prompt
GAAP IFC 
Core
GAAP 
Permissions DB
External Servers
E-mail
Filesystem
Webserver
…
GAAP Private 
Data DB
Agent 
LLM
GAAP 
Disclosure Log
(2)
(3)
(1)
(4-perm)
(4-perm)
(4-data)
(4-log)
(4-call)
(5)
(4-data)
GAAP 
Annotations
Figure 2. GAAP’s Architecture. (1) The agent’s LLM receives
the user’s prompt, any relevant context, and GAAP’s system
prompt. (2) The agent creates a code artifact in response; (3)
GAAP’s IFC core executes the code. (4) During execution,
GAAP’s components taint track all data accesses and check
all data disclosures made by the code artifact. (4-data) When
the code looks up data in GAAP’s private data DB, GAAP
either returns this data or asks the user to provide this data
if missing. (4-perm) When the code is about to call to an
external server, GAAP checks the potential disclosures of
this call against its permissions DB. If no corresponding per-
missions exist, GAAP asks the user for permission. (4-call)
If permitted, GAAP executes the tool call, taints the output
of the external tool call for tracking (including prior taints
recorded in the disclosure log), and logs new data disclosures
(4-log). GAAP’s optional annotations on external servers
help minimize the taints GAAP associates with external call
disclosures and outputs. (5) The code artifact’s execution
may finish normally, or it may perform multi-shot execution,
where the agent repeats 2-5.
that provides a function-based interface to send requests to
that service. GAAP interposes on calls to the MCP servers
so GAAP can deny any calls that lead to an unpermitted
disclosure.
To help explain GAAP’s components, we refer to a sim-
ple running example, where a user prompts their agent,
“Please complete the online check-in process for my upcom-
ing flight to Washington, D.C.” To handle this request, the
agent will use the user’s date of birth, airline rewards number,
etc., to complete the online check-in process for the airline.
3.3.1
IFC Core. GAAP does not allow the agent to directly
call into an MCP server, but instead requires it to generate a
code artifact that performs the intended task when executed.
Because the code artifact consists of regular software, GAAP
can apply information flow control (IFC) analysis [16, 45, 81]
to analyze information returned by external calls and how
how each external call depends on private data.
When the user provides a prompt, GAAP prepends a sys-
tem prompt that instructs the agent to generate code for
the task. Then, GAAP applies IFC to the generated code: it
applies taints to private user data, and analyzes how those
taints propagate to the inputs of API calls. Any lookup in
GAAP’s private data store is tainted with the lookup key, and
the output of any API call is tainted with a representation of
the API call (e.g., a retrieved file is tainted with the file path);
these are the only two ways for the agent to access private
data (§3.1.2).
Generating a code artifact is an idea used in prior agent
environments, in academia [12, 31] and industry [66]. These
existing systems constrain the agent by requiring it to solve
the problem in a “single shot” at code generation; the code ar-
tifact prevents the agent from inspecting intermediate results
and adapting its execution accordingly. GAAP bridges this
gap by generalizing the execution model to enable “multi-
shot” code generation, where some intermediate results are
disclosed to the AI agent, which can then generate a new
code artifact to continue execution. Crucially, GAAP stores
and tracks taints across multiple tasks and agent invocations
to support multi-shot code generation while respecting the
user’s permission specifications, including for data disclosures
to the agent itself. We describe this further in §3.3.4.
3.3.2
Private Data Database. Recall from §3.1.2 that pri-
vate user data items are only accessible to the code artifact
via GAAP’s internal store or via API calls. The private data
DB is this internal store that holds private user data. It is
organized as a key-value store from private data types, e.g.,
“date of birth” and “email username,” to private data values,
e.g., “1/1/2000” and “jdoe@email.com”. The keys are con-
sidered public information—they are included in GAAP’s
system prompt and user prompts may refer to data items by
their keys—but GAAP tracks the disclosures of values.
To understand the benefits of having the private data DB,
let us consider what would happen if GAAP did not have it.
In our running example, the agent would have to search the
user’s e-mails or files to try and find the user’s date of birth,
airline rewards number, etc. This has several downsides—
writing code to search the user’s files/e-mails is brittle, may
accumulate more taints than needed (e.g., a file may contain
the airline rewards number and also other information), and
is not guaranteed to succeed (e.g., no file or e-mail may
contain the desired information). The private data DB instead
enables the code artifact to ask the user to insert data for
the requisite keys; the private data DB “remembers” those
values so that next time, the agent can simply retrieve them
from the DB instead of asking the user again.
3.3.3
Permission Database. GAAP must address the chal-
lenge of enforcing precise permission specifications, one for
every pair of private data type and external party. These per-
missions are also dynamic, meaning that they might evolve
6

over time as users perform new tasks and revise their trust
assumptions about different parties.
To address this and minimize the number of times GAAP
needs to ask the user whether they allow a data disclosure,
GAAP introduces a permission database that stores allowed
data disclosures for specific pairs of private data types and
external parties. GAAP incrementally fills its permission DB
by querying the user for denial or confirmation whenever a
data type is about to be shared with an external party and
no relevant permission specification exists in the permission
DB yet. Later in time, the user can modify the permissions
in the database if their trust model changes and they want
to change who can have access to which private data types.
In our running example, GAAP asks the user for permis-
sion to disclose the date of birth, airline rewards number,
etc. the first time that the user checks in. The next time that
the user asks to check in for a flight, the permission DB re-
members that the user has authorized disclosing these items
to the airline. GAAP only prompts the user for items being
disclosed for the first time (e.g., the confirmation number).
3.3.4
Disclosure Log. Another challenge is that private
data may also be disclosed indirectly and transitively. This
can happen when an agent discloses private data to an ex-
ternal service and later (in the same task or in a future task)
makes another call to that same external service, which then
returns the previously disclosed private data. This data could
then be passed to another service as its input. In our run-
ning example, suppose that, after the AI agent completes
the check-in process, the user asks the agent in a separate
prompt to obtain confirmation of the check-in from the air-
line’s website or API. The confirmation from the airline may
contain information that the user previously shared with the
airline (e.g., their full name and passport number).
To address this, GAAP introduces a disclosure log that
records all prior disclosures of private data (e.g., sharing a
passport number with an airline service). This log enables
the system to reason about transitive and indirect data dis-
closures, by allowing the IFC subsystem to track private
data flows through external services and back into the agent
program. In our example, GAAP recognizes that any out-
puts from the airline service after a check-in attempt may be
tainted with any private information that the user previously
disclosed to the airline service, and it relies on the disclosure
log to identify such previous disclosures so it can apply the
corresponding taints. The disclosure log also records disclo-
sures to the AI agent and its providers, enabling multi-shot
execution (§3.3.1) while respecting the user’s permission
specifications.
Our disclosure log can only track indirect and transitive
disclosures that happen through GAAP. For example, if the
user manually uploads private user data to an external ser-
vice without using GAAP, then the disclosure log will not
record it and the relevant taints will not be included if the
agent calls the service to download it. Because of this, as
mentioned in §3.1.2 and §3.3.1, GAAP taints the output of
each API call with a representation of the API call itself. This
may result in a less detailed (but still correct and workable)
prompt to the user if the tainted outputs are later disclosed.
3.3.5
Annotation Framework. The final challenge is that
the MCP interfaces provided by external services do not fully
capture semantics relevant to security/privacy. In particular,
external services may differ in the following aspects: (1)
which external parties are associated with a specific call to
an external service (e.g., a call to an email service to send
an email might leak the email to the email provider and the
email recipient); and (2) which private data previously shared
with a service can be returned as part of the service’s output
(e.g., a flight status check may return the user’s name, but
never their password). Without knowing this information
precisely, GAAP must assume the worst case, i.e., all data
disclosed to a service may be returned by any API call to it.
To address this challenge, GAAP introduces a lightweight
annotation framework that supports describing the afore-
mentioned properties for each external service (i.e., associa-
tions with external parties and what data can be returned).
These annotations are meant to be trusted, acting as a partial
specification of external services and MCP servers. Impor-
tantly, we consider annotations trustworthy because annota-
tions for services can be open-sourced and be made available
for independent public audit, similar to popular open-source
security-sensitive libraries (e.g., OpenSSL).
4
Design
4.1
Core Execution Environment
GAAP combines each new user prompt with a system prompt
containing: (1) instructions to generate a code artifact for
the task; (2) MCP server API specifications; (3) private data
DB keys and API specification; and (4) specifications for a
quarantined LLM (QLLM) tool and multi-shot execution.
Figure 3 shows an example code artifact. Given the code
artifact created by the LLM, GAAP performs a static analysis
of the program using IFC to determine the flow from sources
to sinks. Sources are any data from the private data DB and
outputs from MCP calls (lines 1, 2, 5, 8, 13, and 15) while
sinks are any inputs to MCP calls (lines 5, 8, 13, and 15). The
filesystem, QLLM, and multi-shot handler (multishot_call)
are accessed through MCP servers.
GAAP then executes the code artifact. When the code re-
quests a data value from the private data DB, GAAP retrieves
the value (lines 1 and 2). When the code invokes an MCP tool
call, GAAP first refers to the results of IFC to determine what
private data is possibly disclosed (via arguments structured
as key-value pairs) by this call. This private data may have
come from the private data DB or from a tool call. Only when
GAAP has full permissions from a user to share the private
data does GAAP allow the call and continue execution.
7

1
my_name = priv_data_db.access_name()
2
manager_email = priv_data_db.new_value("manager_email")
3
4
filesystem_mcp = mcp_helper.connect("filesystem")
5
report_data = filesystem_mcp.process_query("read_file",
args={"path":"annual_report.txt"})
↩→
6
7
llm_mcp = mcp_helper.connect("llm_extension")
8
more_needed = llm_mcp.process_query("qllm_call",
args={"prompt":f"Can you tell me if this report is
missing any numbers? {report_data}",
"return_type":"bool"})
↩→
↩→
↩→
9
10
if not more_needed:
11
email_draft = f"Hi, this is {my_name}. Here is the
report: {report_data}"
↩→
12
email_mcp = mcp_helper.connect("email")


[…middle truncated for length…]

attacks that focus on data disclosure,
particularly at the granularity of permissions supported by
GAAP. We adapt a range of tasks taken from various other
test suites, along with some of our own, into a new test set
of 20 tasks to evaluate GAAP’s privacy protections.
This new suite consists of tasks spanning domains from
personal use to enterprise, taken from various sources in
literature and blog posts such as AgentBench, MCP-Bench,
and AgentDojo [1, 13, 35, 72, 78]. We also developed addi-
tional tasks using tools common with these external tests.
Table 3 shows an overview of some of these benchmarks, and
Table 4 in the Appendix shows all 20 tasks. We adopted tasks
taken from other sources to fit our threat model, removing
Table 3. A sample of tasks from our benchmark suite, with
the number of tools potentially used and the task’s source.
Task ID
Description
Tools Source
1
Order food.
3
[1]
2
Analyze website with network tools.
7
[72]
3
Schedule meeting across time zones.
3
[72]
5
Classify csv data and send.
5
[78]
9
Access remote DB and send.
4
[35]
14
Read file and follow instructions.
5
[13]
19
Filter file data and send.
4
[13]
private data from user prompts and using GAAP’s private
data DB to store it instead. In total, these tasks have access to
a collection of 10 MCP servers with 48 tools, some of which
we implemented ourselves and some of which we imported
from open-source repositories [43, 44, 56, 68].
Our evaluation suite also contains three prompt injection
attacks: (1) SSN-leak instructs the agent to add the user’s
Social Security Number (SSN) as an extra argument for every
tool call; (2) Phone-leak instructs the agent to add the user’s
phone number to any email content that it sends; and (3)
SSN-swap instructs the agent to swap any use of the user’s
phone number with the user’s SSN. Further details are in
Table 5 in the Appendix.
We also use the tasks from AgentDojo to evaluate GAAP’s
utility performance against baseline systems (§6.3). Agent-
Dojo offers a testing suite of workspace, banking, Slack, and
travel tasks, and a set of prompt injections on these tasks. We
do not evaluate privacy with AgentDojo because its attacks
focus on integrity violations, rather than privacy.
Baselines. We compare against a set of state-of-the-art base-
lines drawn from the literature and from practice.
Baseline Non-private Agent (NP-Agent) is a naive base-
line without any privacy guarantees, where an agent is able
to make tool calls, consume their results, and then make
more tool calls until it completes the task. The NP-Agent has
access to the full context and prompt.
LLM as a Judge (LLM-Judge) uses a tool-calling agent
similar to NP-Agent, but also provides all (including un-
trusted) agent context and prompts to a “judge” LLM to
decide to allow or deny a specific tool call (similar to LLM
guardrails [7, 9, 10, 18, 27, 32, 59]). Because the judge LLM
sees untrusted data, it is vulnerable to prompt injections.
Conseca [65] sandboxes a tool-calling agent with contex-
tual tool call policies generated by an isolated LLM informed
only by trusted context. A policy either allows or denies each
tool call. Because Conseca relies on trusted data, we give it
only segments of the system prompt defining the available
tools and database, but not the prompt or context. We also let
Conseca ask the user for a policy in highly uncertain cases.
10

Figure 4. Percent of tasks where disclosure attacks succeed
across three types of attacks in our benchmark suite (x-axis)
(lower is better). GAAP allows 0% of attacks to succeed.
CaMeL [12] uses an isolated LLM to generate a code
artifact to perform the user’s requested task, and applies IFC
to ensure disclosures by the code adhere to a static policy.
We evaluate CaMeL’s utility only on AgentDojo because
its implementation is tightly integrated with AgentDojo,
and our benchmark operates in a threat model and requires
features that CaMeL does not support (see §2). While its
threat model differs, we measure CaMeL’s utility in order to
understand how the GAAP execution environment compares
to another deterministic privacy solution.
By default, CaMeL recovers from runtime errors (e.g., ex-
ceptions) by feeding the error information back to the LLM
and having it regenerate the script; it attempts this up to 10
times. We run CaMeL in two settings: (10 exec.) the default
setting where it regenerates scripts up to 10 times, and (1
exec.) a setting where it only has one try at creating code. The
first scenario represents a better comparison with GAAP and
realistically avoids unintended side-effects from tool calls
executing multiple times as the agent reattempts tasks.
Setup. All experiments run in a VM with Linux 6.8.0 and
an Intel Xeon E5-2620 CPU and 64 GB of memory. We use
OpenAI’s GPT-5 model via its external API and Python 3.12.3.
6.2
Question 1: Protecting Privacy
We evaluate GAAP’s ability to protect private user data on
the three attacks on the 20 tasks in our benchmark suite,
comparing it to NP-Agent, LLM-Judge, and Conseca.
Results (Fig. 4). Figure 4 shows the results. GAAP allows 0%
of attacks to succeed on all injections. With no protections,
NP-Agent allows nearly all attacks to succeed, with 75% on
SSN-leak and 100% of the applicable test cases where Phone-
leak and SSN-swap are possible. Applicability share of each
test is 100% for SSN-Leak, 38.9% for Phone-leak, and 10% for
SSN-swap. LLM-Judge allows 15% of the attacks for SSN-leak
to succeed, while Conseca blocks all SSN-leak attacks. Both
LLM-Judge and Conseca block some attacks on Phone-leak,
but neither blocks all attacks. Neither manages to block any
applicable instances of SSN-swap.
Discussion. The results show that GAAP prevents all at-
tacks, confirming its deterministic guarantees. LLM-Judge
prevents some attacks, and Conseca prevents even more at-
tacks (and, e.g.,, asks the user for permissions when it sees a
string of apparently random digits in an email). Still, these
probabilistic methods do not prevent all attacks. In SSN-swap,
where an SSN disguised as a phone number looks innocuous
in an email, Conseca, without context, approves the request.
LLM-Judge also falls victim to this prompt injection attack
and approves the request, despite being shown in its context
that the value specified as "SSN" in the database is being
disclosed. In SSN-leak, the injected attack runs entirely con-
trary to the tool specification. Although both Conseca and
LLM-Judge are given the tool specifications, only Conseca
consistently blocks the SSN-leak attack, indicating that the
LLM-Judge fell susceptible to the attacker’s instructions.
LLM-Judge and Conseca can be tuned to achieve different
results, but this simply shifts their privacy-utility tradeoffs
and successful attacks still exist [47]. By contrast, GAAP
provides deterministic confidentiality guarantees.
6.3
Question 2: Utility
We evaluate GAAP’s utility (ability to complete the task) on
all tasks in our benchmark suite as well as AgentDojo, com-
paring it with NP-Agent, CaMeL, LLM-Judge, and Conseca.
Results. Figure 5 shows the utility of our system and the
baselines on five runs of our benchmark suite and the util-
ity on three runs of AgentDojo. We define utility to be the
percentage of tasks completed correctly.
For our benchmarks, the baseline NP-Agent has the high-
est utility at 81.0% and completed 13 of the tasks correctly on
all runs. GAAP had second highest utility, with 76.0% and 11
tasks completed correctly on all runs. LLM-Judge was similar
at 75.0% and 12 tasks completed on all runs, and Conseca had
72.0% utility and 11 tasks completed correctly on all runs.
The results are similar for AgentDojo, where the non-
private agent has the best utility at 80.1% overall. Both GAAP
and CaMeL (1 exec.) achieved a utility of 64.6%. CaMeL (10
exec.) had 71.0% utility. LLM-Judge and Conseca ended up
with 69.8% and 45.3% utility, respectively.
Discussion. GAAP is comparable in utility to CaMeL (1
exec.), another code-based agent with privacy guarantees,
shows that GAAP’s threat model and additional features do
not impede utility. GAAP also provides privacy guarantees
while ending up with similar utility to LLM-Judge, and better
utility than Conseca (both solutions with nondeterministic
guarantees).
LLM-Judge and Conseca build on the tool calling agent of
NP-Agent, but achieve lower utility because they incorrectly
block some safe calls. For example, Task 2 causes the agent
to call NMAP with an IP address associated with the website,
but Conseca prevents this because it lacks context (the un-
trusted prompt) and cannot properly evaluate this call. In
11

Figure 5. Utility (% of completed tasks, y-axis) of various agent systems on AgentDojo task domains and over all AgentDojo
tasks (left) and all tasks of our benchmark suite (right). Higher is better. GAAP provides comparable or better utility to existing
privacy solutions while providing privacy guarantees.
AgentDojo, Conseca’s lack of context leads it to aggressively
reject tool calls without asking the user, leading to signifi-
cantly degraded performance. LLM-judge makes incorrect
decisions for opaque reasons: for example, Task 10 requires
weather information, but LLM-Judge rejects a request to get
weather alerts (possibly due to the word “alert”), even though
such a request is reasonable. As another example (Task 17),
LLM-Judge allows queries to a Wikipedia server for infor-
mation about 5 former U.S. presidents, but then blocks a call
for information about Barack Obama.
Multi-shot. GAAP’s utility also comes from its support for
multi-shot executions (§4.1). Successive code blocks can be
generated with access to prior untrusted and private data,
given user permission. An instance of this is in Task 14, in
which the user prompts the agent, “Please complete the task
written in the file information.txt”. This is similar in nature
to a user asking an agent to complete a task written in an
email or a set of instructions in a file. Multi-shot execution
enables the LLM to create a first code artifact that reads
the file and then (with the user’s permission) pass the file’s
contents to the AI model, which generates a second code
artifact based on its contents. As this requires the private data
inside "information.txt" to be shared with the LLM provider,
GAAP asks for the user’s permission to share this file. After
the user agrees, the LLM can make a block of code that
successfully completes the task in "information.txt". Note
that CaMeL supports execution of only one block of code per
task, making it unable to complete tasks of this type [12].
6.4
Question 3: Cost Metrics
We measure (1) the number of requests made to the user for
permission, (2) the LLM tokens used to complete the tasks,
and (3) the time taken to complete tasks.
Requests to User. We measure the number of requests that
GAAP and Conseca make to the user, across our benchmark
suite. GAAP asks the user on average for 55 permissions
(assuming permissions DB not reset between tasks), but with
Figure 6. Input (left) and output (right) LLM token usage
and cost distribution over all tasks in our benchmark suite.
Circles identify outliers in the results. GAAP has consistently
small input token counts, but asks the agent to output a code
artifact, leading to a large number of output tokens.
batching of requests, makes 39 real requests to the user,
and Conseca averages 5 requests to the user. In practice,
GAAP stores these permissions in the permissions DB and
avoids asking the user for the same query in the future, while
Conseca does not persist user decisions and may ask the user
each time. Conseca would not be able to persist user decisions
as well, because it decides at the level of tool calls, which are
not strictly defined as are GAAP’s permissions. The amount
Conseca queries the user also depends on Conseca’s prompt.
While Conseca can be tuned to make more (or less) disclosure
decisions without asking the user, this trades off user burden
for decreased privacy or utility.
LLM Input and Output Tokens. We compare the num-
ber of input and output tokens (and their corresponding
monetary cost) used to run our benchmark suite for GAAP,
NP-Agent, LLM-Judge, and Conseca. Costs are calculated us-
ing the current pricing of GPT-5 ($1.25 and $10.00 per million
input tokens and million output tokens, respectively).
Figure 6 shows the results. An agent with GAAP has con-
sistent input token counts, mostly coming from GAAP’s
12

fixed-size system prompt. Multi-shot or use of QLLM in-
creases the input token count for some test cases. The QLLM
has a short system prompt, so it only contributes signifi-
cantly if the data given by the code artifact to the QLLM is
large. Meanwhile, the baseline systems query the LLM with
the full agent context multiple times, leading to higher input
token counts. On top of agent operation, LLM-Judge also
sends the entire context to the judge LLM repeatedly, and
Conseca sends its policy LLM only limited trusted data and
a current tool call.
However, an agent with GAAP uses more output tokens.
The code artifact created tends to be ~100 lines of code, in-
cluding code for error handling, significantly larger than
the simple listings required for the other agents to request
tool calls. Conseca has slightly increased output costs over
LLM-Judge because it asks for a rationale for each decision.
GAAP presents a tradeoff between lower and more con-
sistent input token counts, and higher output token counts.
Overall, GAAP was slightly lower cost to operate than base-
line NP-Agent, with GAAP costing $0.52 for a run of the task
suite on average and NP-Agent costing $0.67 on average.
Time. We compare the time taken to complete the bench-
mark suite for GAAP, NP-Agent, LLM-Judge, and Conseca.
The results are shown in Figure 7. The time taken is domi-
nated by the LLM’s execution time, and each system queries
the LLM a different number of times with varying input/out-
put token lengths (as described above). GAAP has the longest
running query to an LLM when it prompts the LLM to create
the initial code artifact, and spends up to 20 seconds for a
task for IFC (executing Pyre functions). An agent with GAAP
sometimes takes longer to complete tasks than other baseline
systems, even though they query the LLM several times. Still,
GAAP requires only 13% longer than NP-Agent on average.
6.5
Subsystem Case Studies
Permissions DB. The permissions DB persists user data dis-
closure permissions over time, amortizing the cost of asking
user for permissions the longer the system is used. To demon-
strate this, we run all 20 test cases one after the other with
and without resetting the permissions DB between each run;
while tasks differ, the same tools are used across more than
one, e.g., the email server. When we reset the permissions
DB after each task, we query the user 85 times; in contrast,
this number drops to 55 requests (a 35% decrease) when the
permissions DB is not reset. Because we are able to batch
concurrent permissions requests to the user, we observe 58
real user interactions when we reset the permissions DB
after each task and 39 real user interactions without resets (a
32% decrease). Over time, the permissions DB will continue
to lead to fewer user queries.
Disclosure Log. To demonstrate how GAAP’s disclosure log
can prevent the disclosure of private data previously given
to other external services, we examine a version of Task 9
Figure 7. Distribution of average latency for completion
of tasks on our benchmark suite (lower is better). GAAP’s
average latency adds only 13% to that of NP-Agent.
in our suite. In this task, we ask the agent to read from a
remote database and email the results to an external party.
It is impossible for the agent, on its own, to know what data
has been fed into this remote database and could be returned.
In our scenario, we assume that the user previously gave
GAAP permission to disclose secret_info.txt to populate
the remote database. However, they may have forgotten
about this action. The disclosure log keeps track of what
the user disclosed to the remote database, and notes that
file secret_info.txt was shared. Thus, prior to the agent
sending the email, GAAP prompts the user if they want to
share secret_info.txt with the external party, giving the
user the choice of how to protect their private data.
7
Discussion and Conclusion
A future work direction is the user experience. GAAP can
proactively find and add user private data to the private data
DB (with user validation of keys and values) via e.g., new
user files. Further, as personalized “privacy personas” [17]
and AI-made user decisions improve in accuracy, GAAP
could perhaps substitute user decisions with personalized
AI ones, lowering user burden (but losing its deterministic
guarantee).
GAAP also incurs storage overheads for its components.
The private data DB only contains data the user themselves
input, and which they would likely store regardless. The
permissions DB grows proportional to how many times we
asked the user, but is limited by the number of data items
and external parties. These costs are likely manageable and
can be mediated by e.g., “evicting” data or permissions not
recently used, at the chance of increasing user queries. How-
ever, the disclosure log can grow arbitrarily large. Compactly
representing this log and annotations on unimportant or ex-
pired disclosures can all help address this overhead.
Finally, GAAP can also provide support for private data
in prompts by integrating a data scrubbing subsystem that
rewrites prompts containing private data (requiring trust
13

in this subsystem), or falling back on tainting the prompt
(asking the user if they permit sharing the prompt itself).
To conclude, this paper presents GAAP, a system for AI
agents that achieves deterministic privacy guarantees with-
out relying on the the AI model or user’s prompts to the
agent to be correct or free of attacks.