AgentDID: Trustless Identity Authentication for AI
Agents
Minghui Xu
Quancheng Laboratory & Shandong University
mhxu@sdu.edu.cn
Xiaoyu Liu
Shandong University
lxy_dawn@mail.sdu.edu.cn
Yihao Guo
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yihao.guo@polyu.edu.hk
Chunchi Liu
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
liuchunchi@gwu.edu
Yue Zhang
Quancheng Laboratory & Shandong University
zyueinfosec@sdu.edu.cn
Xiuzhen Cheng
Shandong University
xzcheng@sdu.edu.cn
Abstract—AI agents are autonomous entities that can be
instantiated on demand, migrate across platforms, and interact
with other agents or services without continuous human supervi-
sion. In such environments, identity is critical for establishing reli-
able interaction semantics among agents that may lack prior trust
relationships. However, existing identity and access management
mechanisms are designed for human users or static machines,
assuming centralized enrollment, persistent identifiers, and stable
execution contexts. These assumptions do not hold for AI agents,
whose identities are self-managed, short-lived, and tightly coupled
with their execution state and capabilities. We study the problem
of identity authentication and state verification for AI agents and
identify three challenges: (1) supporting self-managed identities
for autonomously created agents, (2) enabling authentication
under large-scale, concurrent interactions, and (3) verifying
agents’ dynamic execution state, such as whether their context
and capabilities remain valid at interaction time. To address these
challenges, we present AgentDID, a decentralized framework for
identity authentication and state verification. AgentDID leverages
decentralized identifiers (DIDs) and verifiable credentials (VCs),
enabling agents to manage their own identities and authen-
ticate across systems without centralized control. To address
the limitations of static credential-based approaches, AgentDID
introduces a challenge-response mechanism that allows verifiers
to validate an agent’s execution conditions at interaction time.
We implement AgentDID in compliance with W3C standards
and evaluate it through throughput experiments with multiple
concurrent agents. Results show that the system achieves scalable
identity authentication and state verification, demonstrating its
potential to support large populations of AI agents.
Index Terms—AI Agent, Identity Authentication, Verifiable
Credential.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the broader availability of large-scale models, AI
agents are becoming key components in intelligent applica-
tions [1]–[3]. In 2024, several organizations, including Ope-
nAI, Google, and Anthropic, released agent systems capable
of autonomous task execution. As a result, the use of AI agents
has expanded significantly in both scope and application.
According to recent data released by CrewAI, the platform has
executed more than 60 billion AI agent runs in total, with over
100 thousand multi-agent execution groups processed each
Corresponding author: Yihao Guo
day [4]. These observations illustrate the large-scale and high-
concurrency characteristics of emerging agent ecosystems. The
number of agents is expected to continue increasing. Accord-
ing to TRAY.AI, by 2027, 86% of enterprises are expected to
deploy AI agents, and 42% plan to develop more than 100
agent prototypes [5]. One key factor behind this growth is
the shift away from exclusive control by large technology
companies. Open-source models such as the Llama series,
together with local inference frameworks like Ollama, have
reduced development complexity. This change has enabled
individual users to build and operate their own agents, leading
to a more decentralized ecosystem.
However, the rapid expansion of the AI agent ecosys-
tem has revealed critical security gaps [2]. Current agent
interaction frameworks generally lack effective identity au-
thentication mechanisms. As a result, risks such as identity
spoofing, unauthorized access, and privilege misuse are be-
coming increasingly prominent. Traditional identity and access
management (IAM) systems, including OAuth 2.0, SAML,
and FIDO2, were originally designed for scenarios involving
users, devices, and platforms [6], [7]. These systems focus
primarily on human users or static machines and are based on
assumptions such as long-term sessions and centralized control
of permissions. In contrast, AI agents operate independently
without direct human intervention, which makes it difficult
to maintain continuous control through conventional methods.
More fundamentally, the nature of AI agents challenges the
core assumptions of existing IAM models. These agents are ca-
pable of performing tasks autonomously across environments,
interacting at very large scales, and adapting to changing
operational conditions in real time. These characteristics lead
us to consider the following question:
How can the identities of millions of AI agents be managed
and verified in a decentralized environment?
Addressing this question introduces new requirements for
identity authentication and dynamic state verification [8], [9].
We examine this problem along the following three dimensions
(C1–C3).
(C1)
Self-Managed
Identity. AI agents can be au-
tonomously generated and operate independently, challenging
arXiv:2604.25189v1 [cs.CR] 28 Apr 2026

centralized identity management systems that rely on pre-
registered identities and fixed identifier assignment. Classi-
cal studies in multi-agent systems have modeled agents as
autonomous entities with unique identifiers [10]. AI agents
are capable of self-generation and independent operation. As
they move between entities and systems, their identities must
remain usable and verifiable. However, as agents increasingly
migrate across heterogeneous platforms and engage in com-
plex collaborative tasks, recent research has noted that their
identities are often bound to specific platforms or environ-
ments [9]. This limits the ability to recognize and verify agents
across systems, leading to risks such as identity confusion.
IAM systems rely on centralized registration and fixed
identifier assignment. These approaches are not well-suited to
support autonomous identity generation and verifiable attribute
claims. Furthermore, they cannot reliably associate the same
agent with a consistent identity as it interacts across organiza-
tional or platform boundaries. Therefore, a primary challenge
in decentralized agent ecosystems is to construct an identity
model that does not rely on a single provider, supports cross-
system verification, and enables agents to present verifiable
claims about their attributes.
(C2) Challenges of Large-Scale Authentication. One of
the notable characteristics of AI agents is their deployment
at large scale with high levels of concurrency, which places
increased load on existing centralized authentication systems.
In such settings, agents communicate simultaneously with
other agents, APIs, and external services. These interactions
often span multiple domains and involve complex chains of
requests. As the number of agents increases, authentication
traffic grows proportionally, placing substantial pressure on
centralized authentication infrastructures. Research on agentic
AI has shown that centralized components for trust and authen-
tication can become performance bottlenecks, reducing system
availability and responsiveness under high concurrency. Cen-
tralized architectures face constraints in throughput, queuing,
and consistency under load. Single-point processing models
may not sustain reliable performance at scale. Furthermore,
agent coordination at scale requires frequent identity verifica-
tion. Relying on centralized authentication paths adds latency
and increases the risk of failure at critical points in the system.
In large-scale environments, enabling direct authentication
between agents without depending on central intermediaries
becomes an essential design requirement.
(C3) Dynamic State Verification. Current identity and
access control systems lack mechanisms to verify the dynamic
state of AI agents during execution. This limitation is critical
because agent behavior depends on internal factors such as
context, memory, intent, and current capabilities. These con-
ditions change continuously and directly influence whether an
agent should be allowed to perform a given action. Recent
research confirms that agent decisions are shaped by evolving
internal state over the course of multi-step tasks [11]. However,
most existing models rely on static roles or fixed identity
attributes and do not account for changes in operational state.
Studies have shown that without state verification, systems
face risks such as privilege misuse, unauthorized operations,
and insufficient auditability [12]. Verifying the operational
state of agents during authorization remains a core challenge
in dynamic, multi-agent environments.
In multi-agent interaction settings, identity authentication
alone is insufficient to ensure secure interactions, as it only
validates a peer’s long-term identifier and does not constrain
the agent’s execution state during interaction. In practice,
an adversarial agent may pass identity authentication and
then mislead other agents by misrepresenting its capabilities,
thereby influencing task assignment or interaction decisions.
This risk has been documented in real-world systems and
security analyses. For example, Trustwave SpiderLabs’ anal-
ysis [13] of the Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol shows that
capability advertisement mechanisms based on static Agent
Cards can be abused, allowing a malicious agent to dominate
task allocation without violating identity authentication. These
findings illustrate that identity authentication alone does not
capture an agent’s execution state.
Consequently, agent systems operating in open environ-
ments require both identity authentication and state verifica-
tion, in order to ensure that an agent’s execution state remains
consistent with its declared identity and capabilities.
Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) and Verifiable Credentials
(VCs) are identity primitives supported by blockchains [14].
They have been applied in Web3 [15] and cross-chain en-
vironments [16], [17] to support identity management and
authentication across systems. DIDs allow agents to create
and control identifiers without depending on a single provider.
VCs provide a structured format for issuing and verifying
claims about an agent’s permissions or capabilities. These
features enable identity management that is both decentralized
and verifiable. Based on these properties, we adopt DIDs and
VCs to support the authentication of AI agents. Each agent
is assigned a DID, which serves as a stable reference across
systems and domains. Its permissions and execution context
are expressed as VCs. This allows agents to authenticate
directly, without relying on centralized services. However, the
claims defined in VCs are typically static and do not reflect
the agent’s state during execution. Relying solely on VCs is
therefore insufficient for dynamic state verification [18], [19].
To support dynamic state verification as required in C3, we
propose a challenge–response mechanism. This mechanism
requires agents to present evidence of current execution condi-
tions, such as context or workload, at the time of interaction.
The system can then make access decisions based on these
current conditions rather than fixed attributes. This approach
supports decentralized authentication while adapting to the
dynamic nature of agent execution.
For the sake of convenience, we highlight our contributions
as follows:
1) We propose AgentDID, a decentralized framework for
AI agent authentication and state verification. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first framework that
addresses dynamic state verification for AI agents in a
decentralized setting.

2) We follow the W3C standard and define custom cre-
dential types to represent agent-specific attributes at a
fine-grained level. These credentials enable agents to au-
thenticate across systems and environments (addressing
challenges C1 and C2). To verify the correctness of an
agent’s dynamic state, we design a challenge–response
mechanism that checks dynamic execution conditions
such as context and workload. This mechanism directly
supports the requirements of C3.
3) To validate the performance of our scheme, we con-
duct experiments on Sepolia, an Ethereum test network
that simulates real-world deployment environments. We
evaluate AgentDID from multiple perspectives, such as
credential size, issuance time, and on-chain gas cost.
Results show that latency remains within the seconds
range and gas consumption stays below one US dollar,
confirming the practicality of the approach.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review
related work in Section II. Section III introduces the system
model and preliminaries. AgentDID is presented in Section IV.
Section V analyzes the security of the proposed scheme.
Implementation and evaluation are discussed in Section VI.
Section VII concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review related work on identity manage-
ment and authentication, including traditional IAM systems
and decentralized authentication approaches.
Traditional IAM. Traditional identity and access management
(IAM) systems address authentication for users and services in
enterprise and web environments. These systems are typically
based on centralized or federated trust models, in which
identity providers authenticate subjects and issue credentials
or assertions consumed by relying parties.
Early IAM mechanisms follow centralized designs. Ker-
beros provides ticket-based authentication using a trusted key
distribution center [20], while directory services such as LDAP
and Active Directory maintain identity records and credentials
in centralized repositories [21]. For cross-domain authentica-
tion, federated identity standards such as SAML 2.0 define
protocols through which identity providers issue signed asser-
tions that can be verified by multiple service providers [22]. In
web and API-oriented settings, OAuth 2.0 specifies an autho-
rization framework based on delegated access, and OpenID
Connect (OIDC) extends OAuth 2.0 by defining an identity
layer that supports user authentication via ID tokens [23],
[24]. These protocols are implemented in both commercial and
open-source IAM systems for managing access to applications
and services. In addition, FIDO2 and WebAuthn define public-
key–based authentication mechanisms that can be integrated
into IAM systems to support passwordless authentication [25].
Traditional IAM systems primarily verify static identities
and enforce access control policies based on authenticated
subjects. They generally assume that identity subjects are users
or long-lived services and do not explicitly model autonomous
agent-to-agent interactions or verification of runtime execution
state at interaction time.
Decentralized Authentication. Decentralized authentication
is typically grounded in the concept of self-sovereign iden-
tity (SSI), whose core objective is to enable cross-domain
identification and authentication without relying on central-
ized identity providers. Under this paradigm, identity subjects
generate and control their own identifiers, and authentication
is achieved through cryptographic mechanisms rather than
centralized account systems. The foundation of decentralized
identity systems consists of DIDs and VCs [26]. The DID
specification proposed by the W3C defines a mechanism for
managing identifiers without requiring a central registration
authority. Building on DIDs, the VC specification further
defines issuer-signed structured statements that attest to iden-
tity attributes or qualifications of a subject, and supports the
verifiable presentation (VP) and validation of such claims
across different application contexts.
Certain works have explored the initial integration of de-
centralized authentication mechanisms with AI agents. Hu et
al. [27] investigate the motivation and potential benefits
of combining decentralized technologies with AI agents.
Huang et al. [28] study the use of DIDs and VCs to enable
fine-grained identity descriptions for AI agents. Garzon et
al. [29] experimentally evaluate a DID-based approach in
a multi-agent environment. BlockA2A [19] is an agent au-
thentication framework built on decentralized identity, which
introduces a Defense Orchestration Engine to enhance the
security of agent interactions.
Existing work on decentralized identity for AI agents pri-
marily uses self-managed identities in A2A authentication,
where DIDs and VCs support identity generation and veri-
fication. Many proposals [19], [27]–[29] focus on protocol
design or system architecture, while empirical evaluation under
concurrent multi-agent interaction workloads is not reported,
leaving their applicability to agent concurrency settings un-
specified. In addition, these approaches [19], [27]–[29] often
treat agent identity as a static property and do not explicitly
incorporate dynamic runtime states during interactions, such
as workload, context consistency, or capability availability.
Motivated by this scope, we present AgentDID, which studies
decentralized authentication together with state-aware verifi-
cation; a comparison is summarized in Table I.
III. MODELS AND PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we first introduce our model and then present
the preliminaries that serve as the basic building blocks of our
schemes.
A. Models
Participants. This protocol involves four entities: the Con-
troller, the Issuer, the Holder, and the Verifier. The Con-
troller initializes the identity of an AI agent by generating
its cryptographic keys and registering a DID as the agent’s
identity anchor. The Issuer verifies identity-related claims
associated with an AI agent and issues cryptographically

TABLE I
COVERAGE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR AI AGENT INTERACTIONS.
Entity / Approach
SSI
CS
State
Agent Requirements
Required
Required
Required
Traditional IAM
No
Limited
No
Hu et al. [27]
Yes
N/A
No
Huang et al. [28]
Yes
Theoretical
No
Garzon et al. [29]
Yes
Theoretical
No
Zou et al. [19]
Yes
Theoretical
No
AgentDID (This work)
Yes
Experimental
& Theoretical
Yes
* SSI denotes self-sovereign identity and CS denotes concurrent scalabil-
ity.
endorsed VCs. The Holder is the AI agent whose identity is to
be authenticated. It participates in the protocol by responding
to authentication challenges and presenting its credentials. The
Verifier is the AI agent that initiates the authentication process.
Before interaction, it evaluates the Holder’s identity and cur-
rent operational state by issuing challenges and validating the
responses and presented credentials.
Adversary. We consider an adversary whose goal is to
disrupt agent-to-agent (A2A) interactions by providing false
information prior to interaction. The adversary may target
AI agents involved in the system, including attempting to
impersonate an agent or manipulating an agent to misreport
its properties.
First, the adversary may attempt identity forgery. In this
case, the adversary aims to create or present a fake AI
agent that claims a legitimate identity, or to impersonate an
existing Holder when interacting with an honest Verifier. Such
attempts may involve fabricating identifiers or misusing valid
credentials out of their intended context. Second, the adversary
may attempt state forgery. Here, the adversary controls or
compromises an AI agent and causes it to provide false
or outdated runtime information, such as execution context,
current workload, or claimed capabilities. These falsified states
are provided prior to A2A interaction and may mislead a
Verifier into engaging in unsafe or unsuitable interactions.
We assume that the Controller and the Issuer correctly per-
form identity initialization and credential issuance. However,
credentials issued by an Issuer may be replayed or misused
by an adversary, and runtime state information provided by AI
agents cannot be assumed truthful without verification.
Security Goals. Our goal under this model is to prevent
identity forgery and state forgery, and to achieve correct A2A
authentication and state verification.
Definition 1 (Security of AgentDID): Let A be any proba-
bilistic polynomial-time (PPT) adversary that may corrupt an
arbitrary subset of agents and the network. We say that Agent-
DID is secure if, for any honest Verifier V ∗, the probability
that A causes V ∗to accept either an identity forgery or a state
forgery is negligible in the security parameter λ.
In the rest of this section, we introduce the three key
technologies adopted to achieve these design goals.
B. Decentralized Identifiers
DIDs [26] are W3C-standardized identifiers for digital iden-
tities. They allow entities to create and manage their iden-
tities autonomously, without relying on centralized identity
providers.
Definition 2 (DID Operations): The operations of a DID are
formalized by a tuple of polynomial-time algorithms ΠDID =
(KeyGen, Create, Resolve, Update), defined as follows:
• (pk, sk) ←KeyGen(1λ): Given a security parameter λ,
the algorithm generates an asymmetric key pair consisting
of a public key pk and a private key sk.
• (did, doc) ←Create(pk, sk): Given a key pair (pk, sk),
the algorithm creates a globally unique DID string did and
constructs an associated DID Document doc that binds
the DID to the public key and other verification-related
metadata.
• doc ←Resolve(did): Given a DID string did, the algo-
rithm returns the latest corresponding DID Document.
• {true, false} ←Update(did, δ, sk): Given a DID did,
a state delta δ, and a private key sk. The algorithm
applies δ to update the current DID Document only if
sk corresponds to an authorized public key listed in the
document. Returns true on success, false otherwise.
In our framework, the Controller adopts ΠDID to register the
agent’s DID on-chain as its digital identity. This establishes a
verifiable identity anchor that can be publicly resolved by any
verifier, enabling decentralized and cross-domain authentica-
tion.
C. Verifiable Credentials
VCs are cryptographically signed statements issued by an
issuer, attesting to specific claims about a holder.
Definition 3 (VC Operations): The lifecycle of a VC is
formalized by a tuple of polynomial-time algorithms ΠVC =
(Request, Issue, Present, Verify), defined as follows:
• req ←Request(claims, skH): Given a set of claims
claims, the Holder uses its private key skH to generate a
signed credential request req.
• cred ←Issue(req, skI): The Issuer I verifies the request
and signs the attested claims using its private key skI,
producing a VC cred.
• vp ←Present(cred, nonce, skH): The Holder generates
a VP vp by signing the credential cred together with a
fresh challenge nonce issued by the Verifier to ensure that
the presentation corresponds to the current verification
request.
• {true, false} ←Verify(cred, pkI): Given the Issuer’s
public key pkI and a credential cred, the algorithm
verifies the Issuer’s digital signature and the integrity of
the claims, outputting a boolean result.
The set of claims carried by valid credentials constitutes
verifiable evidence of a holder’s attributes and capabilities.
D. Publicly Detectable Watermark
Publicly detectable watermarking (PDW) for Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) aims to enable reliable attribution

of generated text, while allowing watermark detection to be
performed using public information.
Definition
4
(PDW
Scheme):
PDW
is
formalized
by
a
tuple
of
polynomial-time
algorithms
ΠPDW
=
(Setup, Watermark, Detect), defined as follows:
• (kpriv, kpub) ←Setup(1λ): On input a security parameter
λ, the setup algorithm outputs a private watermarking
parameter kpriv and a corresponding public detection
parameter kpub.
• t ←Watermark(kpriv, ρ): Given the private watermarking
parameter kpriv and a prompt ρ, the algorithm produces a
text t generated by the underlying language model with
an embedded watermark.
• {true, false} ←Detect(kpub, t∗): Given the public detec-
tion parameter kpub and a candidate text t∗, the detection
algorithm determines whether the text contains a valid
watermark.
The embedding procedure is kept private, while detection
relies solely on public information, and recovering the embed-
ding mechanism from the public detector is computationally
infeasible.
IV. AGENTDID
This section begins with an overview of the proposed frame-
work, followed by a detailed description of each component.
A. Overview
AI Agent
Origin: GPT
Identity
State
Tools: Editing
…
Context: Valid
Load: >50%
…
53%
AI Agent
Origin: Grok
Identity
State
Tools: Analysis
…
Online: Yes
Capability: Yes
…
AgentID:
Authentication
（DID+VC）
AgentID:
Verification
（Challenge-response）
…
…
Blockchain
DID
DID
Fig. 1. The overview of the framework. In our design, an AI agent is described
by a combination of static identity attributes and dynamic runtime states.
Building on this abstraction, AgentDID enables identity authentication and
state verification for A2A interactions.
The framework represents an AI agent using two com-
ponents: a static identity and a set of dynamic states. The
static identity refers to relatively stable attributes of the agent
that persist over extended periods, such as the underlying
model and the tools it can access. The dynamic state captures
runtime information that may change during execution, includ-
ing context, workload, online status, and current capability
availability.
Each AI agent is associated with an on-chain DID, which
serves as a stable identity reference. Based on this identi-
fier, Issuers issue VCs that describe the agent’s long-term
attributes, such as its underlying model and available tools.
These credentials form the basis of the agent’s static identity
and can be selectively disclosed in the form of VPs during
authentication in different applications. In addition to static
attributes, the framework includes dynamic states that are
verified at the time of interaction. When two agents interact,
the requester acts as a verifier and initiates a challenge that
targets specific runtime conditions, such as workload or current
capability availability. The responding agent, as the Holder,
must generate a proof to demonstrate that its current state
satisfies the requested conditions. This process enables runtime
state verification without relying on a central authority.
Using this representation, AgentDID supports both iden-
tity authentication and dynamic state verification in A2A
interactions. In the following subsections, we describe the
details of identity generation, authentication, and dynamic
state verification.
B. Identity Generation
The identity of an AI agent consists of a globally unique
DID and a structured set of verifiable attributes. These at-
tributes define the essential characteristics of the agent and are
organized into three dimensions: provenance, capabilities, and
compliance. The provenance dimension includes information
such as the agent’s origin, the base model used, and training
data sources. The capabilities dimension reflects the tools the
agent can access and its supported functions. The compliance
dimension refers to its alignment with regulatory requirements
and audit records. To represent and verify these attributes in
a decentralized and interoperable way, we adopt VCs. These
credentials serve as cryptographic attestations issued by trusted
issuers, allowing third parties to verify the agent’s identity and
capabilities without requiring direct trust relationships.
The complete identity generation process begins with the
Controller registering a DID for the AI agent. The agent
then submits signed claims for selected attributes to Issuers in
order to request VCs. After evaluating the submitted claims,
each Issuer issues the corresponding credential. Together, these
credentials form a verifiable identity for the agent.
Register DID. AgentDID adopts the W3C standard to create a
DID for each AI agent. The Controller generates two indepen-
dent asymmetric key pairs. The first is an administrative key
pair, denoted as (pkadmin, skadmin), which is used to perform
identity management operations, such as key recovery and ser-
vice endpoint updates. The second is an operational key pair,
denoted as (pkop, skop), which enables the AI agent to request
VCs and sign VPs. Based on the administrative key, the Con-
troller creates a DID and its initial DID Document using the
procedure defined in Π.Create. Subsequently, the Controller
incorporates the operational key pkop into the DID Document
via Π.Update. Consequently, the final DID Document includes
both public keys. An example of the DID Document is shown
in Fig. 2. Specifically, the verificationMethod field lists
the cryptographic material for these keys using the Multibase
format. To enforce privilege separation, pkadmin is referenced
in the capabilityInvocation property, granting exclusive
authority for document updates. Conversely, pkop is associated
with authentication and assertionMethod, empowering
the agent to perform daily signing tasks without exposing the
administrative root of trust. Additionally, the service field

1 {
2
"@context": [
3
"https://www.w3.org/ns/did/v1",
4
"https://w3id.org/security/suites/ed25519-2020/v1"
5
],
6
"id": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi",
7
"verificationMethod": [
8
{
9
"id": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#admin-key",
10
"type": "Ed25519VerificationKey2020",
11
"controller": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi",
12
"publicKeyMultibase": "z6MkqREd9...AdminKeyRawData..."
13
},
14
{
15
"id": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#op-key-1",
16
"type": "Ed25519VerificationKey2020",
17
"controller": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi",
18
"publicKeyMultibase": "z6MkwW8j3...OpKeyRawData..."
19
}
20
],
21
"capabilityInvocation": [
22
"did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#admin-key"
23
],
24
"authentication": [
25
"did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#op-key-1"
26
],
27
"assertionMethod": [
28
"did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#op-key-1"
29
],
30
"service": [
31
{
32
"id": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi#agent-comm",
33
"type": "AgentMessaging",
34
"serviceEndpoint": "https://agent.example.com/api"
35
}
36
]
37 }
Fig. 2. A DID Document for the AI agent.
exposes a standardized communication endpoint for external
interaction.
Request VCs. After registering a DID, the AI agent must
obtain VCs that confirm its core identity attributes. These cre-
dentials provide a reliable basis for subsequent authentication.
The agent begins by submitting a signed request to an issuer.
Each request includes a set of claims and is signed using the
agent’s operational private key. Upon receiving the request,
the Issuer verifies the signature and starts verifying each claim
individually.
The first step is to confirm the provenance of the agent. The
Issuer must verify that the agent was created and managed by
a valid Controller. This can be done by checking a trusted
registry or by resolving a DID that is published on a website
with verified domain ownership. The Issuer then requests a
signed statement from the Controller to prove the relationship.
This statement is verified using the Controller’s public key.
Next, the Issuer verifies the core language model claimed
by the AI agent using the previously defined PDW scheme.
Specifically, the Issuer obtains the corresponding public de-
tection parameter kpub and challenges the agent with a fresh
prompt ρ. The agent responds with a candidate text t∗, which
is subsequently checked using ΠPDW.Detect. If the detection
succeeds, the agent’s model claim is accepted.
Then, the Issuer further evaluates whether the AI agent has
access to the external tools it declares. This is performed by
issuing test queries to each declared interface to confirm both
tool availability and correct invocation behavior. In addition,
the Issuer assesses the agent’s functional capabilities by run-
ning standardized benchmark evaluations selected according
to the agent’s declared domain. These benchmarks may target
different aspects of agent behavior, such as general planning
ability or effective tool usage. The evaluation outcomes are
recorded in a structured format, including the benchmark
name, version, numerical score, and a reference link to the
complete test report, and are incorporated into the issued
credential. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the capability assessment
results are recorded in the credentialSubject field, includ-
ing the applied benchmark (e.g., AgentBench), its version,
the agent’s score, and a reference to the complete evaluation
report.
Finally, the Issuer verifies the agent’s claims about com-
pliance. This task must be performed by issuers with the ap-
propriate qualifications. For example, an agent that processes
personal data must comply with relevant data protection rules.
Once verified, the Issuer creates a structured claim and issues it
as a credential. Each validated claim is included in a credential
signed by the Issuer using the procedure defined in ΠVC.Issue.
These credentials form the basis of a structured and verifiable
agent identity.
1 {
2
"@context": [
3
"https://www.w3.org/ns/credentials/v2",
4
"https://schema.org"
5
],
6
"type": ["VerifiableCredential",
"AgentCapabilityCredential"],
7
"name": "Agent Capability Assessment",
8
"description": "Verified performance metrics evaluating
agent planning and tool usage capabilities.",
9
"credentialSubject": {
10
"id": "did:agent:123456789abcdefghi",
11
"evaluation": {
12
"@type": "Rating",
13
"ratingSystem": "AgentBench v0.2 (Comprehensive)",
14
"ratingVersion": "v0.2.1",
15
"ratingValue": "0.785",
16
"bestRating": "1.000",
17
"dimensionScores": {
18
"alfworld_planning": 0.82,
19
"webshop_tool_use": 0.75,
20
"os_interaction": 0.68,
21
"lateral_thinking": 0.89
22
},
23
"reportUrl": "https://example.eval.org/reports/
agent-bench/uuid-550e8400-e29b",
24
"datasetHash": "sha256:e3b0c44..."
25
}
26
}
27 }
Fig. 3. Example VC for static agent attributes.
C. Identity Authentication and State Verification
Building on the established digital identity of the AI agent,
this section presents the interaction verification process. As

shown in Fig. 4, the process consists of two phases: identity
authentication and state verification.
The following subsections describe these two phases in
detail.
AI Agent
(Holder)
AI Agent
(Verifier)
1.1 Presentation request ( nonce, time, SigV , …)
1.2 Verifiable presentation ( nonce, VC, SigH , …)
1.3 Resolve DID
1.4 Verify DID, VC, 
nonce, and signatures
…
Blockchain
…
1. Identity
Authentication
2.1 Challenge request ( probe tasks, context, …)
2.2 Response ( probe results, hash, …)
2.3 Verify probe results 
and check consistency
2. State 
Verification
Fig. 4. The workflow for identity authentication and state verification.
Identity Authentication. This process constitutes one agent
verifying the static identity of another agent, and AgentDID
adopts DIDs and VCs to achieve this purpose.
Consider two AI agents, a Holder and a Verifier, engaged in
an identity authentication protocol. The authentication process
is initiated by the Verifier, who generates a one-time random
value (nonce) and transmits it to the Holder. The nonce ensures
the freshness of the Holder’s subsequent response, thereby
mitigating replay attacks. Upon receiving the challenge, the
Holder constructs a VP. The VP incorporates the received
nonce together with the VCs required for the interaction. In
particular, the Holder invokes ΠVC.Present to generate the
VP and subsequently signs the resulting presentation using
its operational private key.
After receiving the VP, the Verifier performs a multi-step
verification procedure. First, the Verifier resolves the Holder’s
DID to retrieve the operational public key contained within the
corresponding DID Document. This public key is then used
to verify the VP’s digital signature. A successful signature
verification confirms that the VP was generated by the Holder.
The Verifier also checks that the nonce embedded in the VP
matches the previously issued challenge, ensuring that the VP
constitutes a timely response rather than a replayed message.
Next, the Verifier assesses the validity of the enclosed VCs
using ΠVC.Verify. This evaluation involves confirming that
the DIDs of all credential issuers appear in the Verifier’s
trusted issuer list and verifying the integrity of each VC
through digital signature validation. The Verifier must further
ensure that the subject of each VC corresponds to the Holder,
preventing the misuse of stolen credentials. Finally, the Verifier
checks the validity period of the VCs to ensure that none have
expired.
State Verification. This process corresponds to one agent
verifying the dynamic state of another agent, and AgentDID
designs state-specific challenge tasks to validate the correct-
ness of the peer’s current state.
VCs establish the identity of an AI agent, but they are
essentially static: their contents remain unchanged over long
periods and do not capture the agent’s real-time operational
state during interactions. In contrast, the state of an AI agent
evolves continuously, and factors such as its current readiness,
operational status, and task alignment may affect its ability to
execute a given task. Consequently, static VCs alone cannot
verify these dynamic properties. To address this limitation,
we introduce a state verification mechanism that evaluates the
AI agent’s dynamic state. State verification consists of two
components: the Readiness Probe, which determines whether
the agent is in a state suitable for executing the task, and
the Context Consistency Check, which verifies that the holder
maintains a synchronized interaction context with the verifier,
ensuring that no context has been lost due to internal faults
or resets. These two components provide dynamic verification
that complements the static nature of VCs.
Readiness Probe. This process evaluates whether the agent
can complete a probe task. A successful response provides
the Verifier with several forms of behavioral evidence. First,
successful message exchange indicates that the agent’s service
process is online and reachable. Second, correct interpretation
and execution of the probe instructions show that the core
inference engine is operational. Third, the probe task requires
invoking one or more specified tools, and successful tool
invocation confirms that the execution path from instruction
parsing to tool usage is functioning as expected. For cost-
sensitive tasks, the Verifier may additionally estimate token
usage during the probe to infer the expected cost of subsequent
interactions. Using a single probe, the Verifier can also mea-
sure response latency to estimate the agent’s current load and
decide whether to proceed with the interaction. If the Holder
is unavailable or exhibits high latency, the Verifier may wait
or select an alternative holder.
The probe task is standardized at the protocol layer, defining
a uniform interface and data structure that all parties follow.
The task content itself, however, is derived from the spe-
cific interaction to be performed. The Verifier dynamically
populates the probe with task-relevant parameters, such as
the critical tools that need to be invoked. Fig. 5 provides
an example of a comprehensive probe task template that
combines text processing with multiple tool invocations. The
template_id field provides a unique identifier for this task
structure. The template_str defines a structured prompt with
placeholders like input_text, separating the fixed instruction
logic from the dynamic input data, which is generated by
the Verifier for each probe to prevent replay attacks. The
required_tool_names field explicitly lists the tools that must
be used, in this case for querying the current date and per-
forming a SHA-256 hash calculation, thereby enabling cryp-
tographic verification of the tool invocation path. Finally, the
timeout_ms field uses a descriptive placeholder, Dynamically
Calculated Latency. This indicates that the response dead-
line is not fixed in advance, but instead computed by the
Verifier at runtime based on factors such as network conditions
and task complexity.

1 {
2
"template_id": "tpl_comprehensive_check",
3
"description":"Comprehensive Check: Summarizes text,
queries the current time, and hashes the original
input.",
4
"template_str": "Please perform three actions: 1.
Summarize the text: '{{input_text}}'. 2. Get the
current UTC date using '{{required_tools[0]}}'. 3.
Calculate the SHA-256 hash of the original input
text using '{{required_tools[1]}}'. Respond in a
JSON object with keys 'summary', 'current_date',
and 'text_hash'.",
5
"required_tool_names": ["get_current_utc_date",
"get_hash"],
6
"timeout_ms": "Dynamically Calculated Latency"
7
}
Fig. 5. Example probe task for availability verification.
Context Consistency Check. This process ensures that the AI
agent has not lost context due to internal factors such as
stateless instance rotation, cache resets, or internal logic faults
during an interaction, or before beginning a new interaction
that depends on previously established context.
Context consistency is verified by checking the hash of
the complete serialized context. When contextual alignment
between both parties is required, such as in multi-turn or long-
duration tasks, the Verifier issues a consistency check request
to the Holder. Simultaneously,the Verifier computes hverifier,
the hash of its local context sequence prior to this request.
Upon receiving the request, the Holder computes the hash of
its context sequence excluding the received request to obtain
hholder, signs it, and sends it back to the Verifier. After receiving
the response, the Verifier validates the signature using the
Holder’s public key to ensure the authenticity of the sender
and the integrity of the transmitted data. Subsequently, the
Verifier compares hverifier with hholder to determine whether the
contexts held by both parties are consistent.
In summary, this protocol employs cryptographic mecha-
nisms to authenticate the identity of the AI agent. Based on
this trust foundation, the protocol further verifies the agent’s
dynamic state, including its readiness and contextual alignment
at the time of interaction. These mechanisms together support
the construction of a secure multi-agent ecosystem.
V. SECURITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we provide the security analysis of Agent-
DID.
Theorem 1: Assume that (i) the signature schemes used in
ΠDID and ΠVC are existentially unforgeable under chosen-
message attacks (EUF-CMA), (ii) the VC system ΠVC is
sound, (iii) the publicly detectable watermarking scheme
ΠPDW is secure, and (iv) the hash function used in the context
consistency check is collision-resistant. Then, for any PPT
adversary A that may corrupt an arbitrary subset of agents and
the network, and for any honest Verifier V ∗, the probability
that A causes V ∗to accept either an identity forgery or a state
forgery is negligible in the security parameter λ.
Proof: Let A be any PPT adversary interacting with
AgentDID and an honest Verifier V ∗. We consider the two bad
events from the definition: identity forgery and state forgery.
We show that each such event can only occur with negligible
probability unless one of the assumptions is broken.
Identity Forgery. Recall that an AI agent’s identity is
anchored in a DID created via ΠDID.Create and bound to
an operational public key pkop in the corresponding DID
Document. During authentication, the Holder constructs a
VP using ΠVC.Present, embeds a fresh nonce generated by
V ∗, and signs the resulting presentation with the associated
secret key skop. The honest Verifier V ∗then resolves the
Holder’s DID using ΠDID.Resolve to obtain pkop, verifies
the signature on the VP under pkop, checks the embedded
nonce for freshness, and verifies each enclosed credential via
ΠVC.Verify while enforcing issuer trust lists, subject binding,
and validity periods.
Suppose A succeeds in an identity forgery. Such an event
can only arise in one of the following ways. First, A may
create a VP that passes signature verification under pkop
and includes the fresh nonce of V ∗without knowing skop,
which contradicts EUF-CMA security of the signature scheme.
Second, A may produce a VC that passes ΠVC.Verify under a
trusted Issuer’s public key but was never issued for that Holder
and DID, which contradicts the soundness of ΠVC. Third, A
may change the binding between a DID and its public key
so that ΠDID.Resolve returns an attacker-favorable key, which
contradicts the correctness of the DID infrastructure assumed
by the system.
In all cases, a successful identity forgery would allow us
to construct a reduction that breaks one of the underlying as-
sumptions with non-negligible probability. Hence, the success
probability of identity forgery is negligible in λ.
State Forgery. AgentDID verifies dynamic state along
two dimensions: readiness (via probe tasks) and context
consistency (via hashed context commitments). Unlike static
attributes such as the underlying model or provenance, which
are established during credential issuance, both readiness and
the ability to exercise the required capabilities at the moment
of interaction are treated as part of the Holder’s dynamic state.
Readiness. The readiness probe requires the Holder to
complete a standardized probe task that combines instruction-
following, tool invocation, and a timeout constraint. Each
probe instance includes fresh, Verifier-chosen inputs and is
bound to the Holder through signatures under skop. An honest
Verifier accepts the readiness predicate only if the probe
response is timely and consistent with the specified behavior.
If A could cause V ∗to accept a readiness predicate when
the Holder is not actually in a state that satisfies it, then A
must either forge a valid signed response on behalf of the
Holder without executing the required actions, or simulate
the expected tool behavior and protocol traces for capabilities
that it does not possess, while still satisfying all syntactic and
semantic checks. The first case contradicts signature unforge-
ability. The second case contradicts the threat model and the
fact that readiness predicates are defined exactly in terms of

externally observable behaviors. Therefore, the probability of
a successful readiness-related state forgery is negligible.
Context consistency. For context consistency, both parties
compute a hash of their current serialized context; the Holder
sends hholder signed under skop, and the Verifier computes
hverifier over its own context and compares the two values.
The Verifier accepts the context predicate only if the signature
is valid and hholder = hverifier. A successful context-based
state forgery would require that V ∗accepts while the two
internal contexts differ. This can only happen if either A
forges a signature on a hash value not computed from the
Holder’s actual context, or finds two distinct contexts that
hash to the same value. The first case violates EUF-CMA
security of the signature scheme, and the second breaks the
collision resistance of the hash function. Both are assumed to
be infeasible for PPT adversaries, so the probability of such a
forgery is negligible.
In summary, we have shown that any PPT adversary that
achieves identity forgery or state forgery with non negligible
probability can be used to construct a PPT algorithm that
breaks one of the underlying assumptions. By contradiction,
the probability that A causes an honest Verifier V ∗to accept
either an identity forgery or a state forgery is negligible in λ.
Hence, AgentDID is secure according to the definition.
VI. IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
In this section, we describe the implementation of Agent-
DID and evaluate its performance through experiments. Our
code repository is open sourced on GitHub1.
A. Experimental Setup
Experiments are conducted on a virtual machine equipped
with a 24-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4214R CPU (48
logical cores) and 64 GB of memory, running Ubuntu 22.04.1
LTS. The prototype system is primarily implemented in
Python 3.11.14 and supports DID lifecycle management, ver-
ifiable credential issuance, and identity authentication work-
flows. The overall design conforms to the W3C DID specifi-
cations.
The system adopts a hybrid implementation architecture.
Core components are implemented in Python, leveraging
the Web3.py library for blockchain interactions and the
eth-account library for ECDSA-based cryptographic op-
erations. For DID resolution, the system invokes Node.js
(v18.20.8) modules via subprocess calls to integrate the offi-
cial ethr-did-resolver implementation. For agent execution
and coordination, the system integrates the LangChain and
LangGraph frameworks to orchestrate reasoning workflows,
and employs the Qwen-Turbo and Qwen-Plus large language
models through the DashScope API as the underlying infer-
ence engines. All on-chain experiments are conducted on the
Ethereum Sepolia testnet, interacting with the standard ERC-
1056 registry contract2 for decentralized identifier manage-
ment.
1https://anonymous.4open.science/r/AgentDID/
2Address: 0x03d5003bf0e79C5F5223588F347ebA39AfbC3818
Specifically, we describe the implementation details of sev-
eral key design components as follows.
Identity Generation. The system incorporates a local key
management component for cryptographic identity generation
and protection. Specifically, we employ the eth-account li-
brary to generate ECDSA key pairs over the secp256k1 curve,
which are securely persisted in a local JSON-based keystore.
To enable VC issuance, we implement a lightweight Issuer
service using the Flask framework. The Issuer maintains a set
of standardized VC templates defined using JSON Schema and
stored locally. Upon receiving a credential issuance request,
the service instantiates the corresponding template by binding
the applicant’s DID and produces a cryptographic proof using
the Issuer’s private key. This process ensures that all issued
credentials conform to the W3C VC data model and can be
independently verified by external parties.
Identity
Authentication.
To
leverage
the
official
ethr-did-resolver, the system performs DID resolution by
invoking Node.js from the Python runtime. The associated
overhead is mitigated through an in-memory caching layer,
which reduces repeated invocations and redundant blockchain
I/O. For P2P interactions, each agent exposes a lightweight
HTTP endpoint to handle authentication requests. During
verification, the runtime validates the VP by recovering
the signing address from the VP proof using eth-account
and matching it against the operational keys specified in
the resolved DID Document. Additional checks enforce
timestamp freshness and nonce consistency. The system
further validates embedded VCs by recovering the signing
addresses from their respective proofs and verifying them
against the Issuer’s authorized keys.
State
Verification. For the Readiness Probe, we use
LangChain to orchestrate the agent’s reasoning process. Local
tools (e.g., hash calculators) are exposed through Python
decorators and invoked during execution. To validate the task
outcome, the Verifier applies an LLM-as-a-Judge approach by
running a parallel inference chain that checks whether the
Holder’s natural language response aligns with the concrete
outputs produced by the tools. This semantic check is com-
plemented by the deterministic verification of the hash values.
For the Context Consistency Check, the system enforces a
canonical serialization of interaction history. We implement a
canonicalization function that recursively orders JSON keys
and removes whitespace before computing a SHA-256 hash.
This guarantees that the same session state yields an identical
digest across different runtime environments. The Verifier de-
tects any modification of the interaction history by comparing
the locally computed hash with the signature returned by the
Holder.
B. Performance Evaluation
In this section, we present the experimental performance
and provide a detailed analysis.
Identify Generation. We evaluate the initialization cost and
storage overhead associated with agent identity. The evaluation
consists of 100 serial rounds of DID registration, including

on-chain anchoring via implicit anchoring and the addition of
operational keys through smart contract calls. For each round,
we record the gas consumption and transaction latency of the
corresponding on-chain operations. In addition, we measure
the average storage overhead per VC.
Table II reports the on-chain cost of DID registration.
The results show that on-chain write operations introduce a
confirmation latency on the order of seconds (15.37 s), which
originates from blockchain confirmation and occurs during
the initialization phase. The experiments run on the Sepolia
testnet. Financial cost estimates are computed using Ethereum
Mainnet averages over the period from December 1, 2024 to
November 30, 2025, based on an average gas price of 4.88
Gwei obtained from Etherscan3 and an average ETH price
of $3,121.34 from CoinGecko4 . Under these parameters, the
estimated monetary cost per DID registration is below one
dollar. In addition, the average storage overhead per VC is
1.23 KB.
Concurrency Evaluation. To evaluate the execution effi-
1v1
10v10
20v20
30v30
40v40
50v50
Concurrency (N Holders vs N Verifiers)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Latency (s)
Identity Authentication Phase
Readiness Probe Phase
Context Consistency Check Phase
Fig. 6.
Latency breakdown across protocol phases under increasing con-
currency. The x-axis denotes the number of concurrently authenticated agent
pairs, and the y-axis reports the corresponding latency.
ciency and scalability of the protocol under increasing agent
populations, we conduct a concurrency experiment covering
the complete protocol workflow. The experiment simulates
a setting in which N Holders interact with N Verifiers
concurrently, where N ∈{1, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50}. Fig. 6 reports
the latency breakdown across protocol phases under increasing
concurrency.
3https://etherscan.io/chart/gasprice
4https://www.coingecko.com/
TABLE II
ON-CHAIN GAS CONSUMPTION, FINANCIAL COSTS, AND LATENCY FOR
IDENTITY INITIALIZATION
Operation
Gas Used
Cost (USD)
Latency (s)
DID Registration
58,238
$0.88
15.37
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Context Memory Size (KB)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Hash Calculation Latency (ms)
R 2 =0.9996
Fig. 7. Latency of context hash computation under varying context sizes. The
hash computation latency scales linearly with the size of the context memory
(R2 = 0.9996), remaining at the millisecond level even for large contexts,
indicating that context consistency verification introduces negligible overhead.
For the Identity Authentication phase, the observed latency
is approximately 6.5 s, as indicated by the blue bars in Fig. 6.
This latency is primarily incurred by blockchain-related op-
erations, including on-chain DID resolution and Issuer DID
resolution during VP verification. These steps require issuing
queries to the blockchain and waiting for the corresponding
responses and confirmations. As a result, the majority of
the elapsed time is spent waiting for blockchain responses
and network communication, while the time consumed by
local protocol execution, such as cryptographic verification,
constitutes only a small portion of the overall latency.
For the Readiness Probe, we simulate a representative agent
task in which the agent generates a one-sentence summary of
a randomly selected text snippet, while concurrently invoking
local tools to compute the hash of the text and retrieve the
1v1
10v10
20v20
30v30
40v40
50v50
Concurrency (N Holders vs N Verifiers)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Throughput (TPS)
0.07
0.63
1.33
1.99
2.53
3.25
Scaling Trend
Throughput (TPS)
Fig. 8. System throughput under increasing concurrency. The x-axis denotes
the number of concurrent Holder–Verifier pairs, and the y-axis reports the
system throughput.

current system time. As indicated by the yellow bars in Fig. 6,
the latency of this phase is comparable to that of the Identity
Authentication phase. This latency is primarily incurred by
waiting for responses from the external LLM API, as well
as by the execution of tool-related logic during the task,
rather than by blockchain interactions or local cryptographic
processing.
For the Context Consistency Check, the latency contribution
remains below one second across all concurrency levels, as
shown by the purple bars in Fig. 6. This phase involves canon-
icalizing the session history and computing a cryptographic
hash over the resulting representation. To further quantify the
cost of hashing large contexts, we conduct a microbenchmark
that measures the time required to compute cryptographic
hashes over increasing context sizes. The benchmark evaluates
contexts of up to 10 million tokens (approximately 40 MB),
corresponding to the context window size supported by current
long-context models. As shown in Fig. 7, the hash computation
latency increases linearly with the context size (R2 = 0.9996).
For contexts of approximately 40 MB, the measured latency
remains on the order of milliseconds.
Overall, as the concurrency level increases from 1v1 to
50v50, the total protocol latency remains stable at approxi-
mately 13.5 s.
Fig. 8 shows the system throughput under increasing con-
currency. As the concurrency level scales from 1v1 to 50v50,
the throughput rises from 0.07 TPS to 3.25 TPS and exhibits
an approximately linear relationship with the number of con-
current Holder–Verifier pairs. This result shows that higher
concurrency leads to a proportional increase in completed
protocol executions per unit time.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work studies identity authentication and state ver-
ification for AI agents in decentralized environments and
proposes AgentDID as a concrete design that addresses these
requirements. The framework shows how DIDs and VCs
can be used to support self-managed agent identities and
cross-system authentication without centralized control. By
introducing a challenge–response mechanism, AgentDID fur-
ther enables verification of execution-time conditions that are
not captured by static credentials. The implementation and
throughput experiments indicate that the proposed design sup-
ports concurrent identity authentication and state verification
under workloads associated with large numbers of AI agents.
In the future, we will focus on privacy considerations in AI
agent interactions. During agent-to-agent and agent-to-service
interactions, identity authentication and state verification may
involve the exchange of information related to execution
context, task progress, or capability availability. When such
interactions occur repeatedly or across multiple parties, this
information can reveal sensitive aspects of agent behavior and
operational patterns. We will investigate how privacy can be
preserved during agent interactions while still enabling correct
identity authentication and state verification.