Highlights
PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of Inconsistencies Between Google Play Data Safety
Sections and Privacy Policies Using LLMs
Luca Ferrari, Billel Habbati, Meriem Guerar, Mariano Ceccato, Luca Verderame
• First LLM-based pipeline to automatically audit PP–DSS consistency at scale
• Detected 2,689 omitted declarations across 330 Google Play apps (Q3 2025)
• Average F1-score of 0.76 on manually validated ground-truth subset
arXiv:2604.16128v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of Inconsistencies Between
Google Play Data Safety Sections and Privacy Policies Using LLMs
Luca Ferraria,∗, Billel Habbatib, Meriem Guerarb, Mariano Ceccatoc and Luca Verderameb
aIMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca, Piazza San Francesco 19, Lucca, 55100, Italy
cUniversity of Verona, Strada le Grazie 15, Verona, 37134, Italy
bDIBRIS, University of Genova, Via Dodecaneso 35, Genova, 16146, Italy
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Privacy policy
Data Safety Section
Large language models
Android
Google Play
Privacy compliance
A B S T R A C T
Mobile application developers are required to disclose how they collect, use, and share user
data in compliance with privacy regulations. To support transparency, major app marketplaces
have introduced standardized disclosure mechanisms. In 2022, Google mandated the Data Safety
Section (DSS) on Google Play, requiring developers to summarize their data practices. However,
compiling accurate DSS disclosures is challenging, as they must remain consistent with the
corresponding privacy policy (PP), and no automated tool currently verifies this alignment.
Prior studies indicate that nearly 80% of popular apps contain incomplete or misleading DSS
declarations.
We present PolicyGapper, an LLM-based methodology for automatically detecting discrep-
ancies between DSS disclosures and privacy policies. PolicyGapper operates in four stages:
scraping, pre-processing, analysis, and post-processing, without requiring access to application
binaries. We evaluate PolicyGapper on a dataset of 330 top-ranked apps spanning all 33 Google
Play categories, collected in Q3 2025. The approach identifies 2,689 omitted disclosures,
including 2,040 related to data collection and 649 to data sharing. Manual validation on a
stratified 10% subset, repeated across three independent runs, yields an average Precision of
0.75, Recall of 0.77, Accuracy of 0.69, and F1-score of 0.76. To support reproducibility, we
release a complete replication package, including the dataset, prompts, source code, and re-
sults available at https://github.com/Mobile-IoT-Security-Lab/PolicyGapper and
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19628493.
1. Introduction
The rapid growth of mobile applications has raised increasing concerns about how user data is collected, processed,
and shared. Privacy policies remain the primary mechanism to ensure transparency, yet their effectiveness is often
questioned. Several studies have shown that the Privacy Policy (PP) of mobile apps is complex, vague, contradictory,
and often ineffective [7] [12] [4], which results in users not reading them. As a consequence, users remain unaware
of how their personal data is handled, limiting their ability to provide informed consent and undermining the role of
privacy policies as tools for transparency and accountability. To facilitate user comprehension of privacy policies,
Privacy labels introduced by Kelly et al. [21] have been implemented in the tech industry. These labels provide
a standardized, graphical summary of an application’s data practices—such as data collection, sharing, and usage
purposes—allowing users to quickly understand key privacy information without parsing lengthy legal texts.
Following this paradigm, Google introduced the Data Safety Sections to help users comprehend complex app
privacy practices [31]. As reported in the official documentation of the Google Play Store [16], developers are asked
to compile the DSS for each app describing all the collection, sharing, and other practices for a range of 14 different
user data categories, as well as the purposes for which they use those data in accordance with the corresponding PP.
In this context, data collection refers to any instance in which the application gathers user data (e.g., during account
creation or app usage), while data sharing indicates the transfer of such data to third parties.
Unfortunately, recent studies [3, 26] have revealed that, in most cases, mobile apps fail to report data types or
operations that should be declared according to the DSS requirements. Even more concerning, a 2025 report from
∗Corresponding author
luca.ferrari@imtlucca.it (L. Ferrari); 9032167@studenti.unige.it (B. Habbati); meriem.guerar@unige.it (M. Guerar);
mariano.ceccato@univr.it (M. Ceccato); luca.verderame@unige.it (L. Verderame)
ORCID(s):
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
NowSecure [27] found that 10% of the analyzed Android apps do not publish a Data Safety Section on the Google Play
Store, in clear violation of the store’s regulations.
These omissions or incomplete disclosures can have a twofold impact. On the one hand, users may develop a false
sense of privacy regarding how their personal data is handled, undermining their ability to make informed decisions
about app usage and contradicting the transparency goals of the DSS. On the other hand, developers may incur fines
for non-compliance with applicable data privacy and data protection laws (e.g., up to 4% of the annual worldwide
turnover [20]), while Google may reject updates or even remove non-compliant apps from the store [15].
Despite the importance and central role of the DSS in ensuring transparency and regulatory compliance, verifying
its consistency with the information stated in the PP remains a challenging task. Manual assessment of these
documents requires both technical and legal expertise. It involves analyzing actual data behavior and interpreting
privacy statements to evaluate compliance with store policies and applicable regulations. In addition, such a process is
time-consuming, resource-intensive, and often beyond the capabilities of individual developers or small organizations.
Moreover, the evolution of applications through the release of updates could introduce misalignment between the
different versions of the DSS and the PP, making the identification of these inconsistencies even more difficult.
In this context, automated tools that support developers in verifying the consistency between the DSS and the
corresponding PP would be highly beneficial. However, to the best of our knowledge, neither the existing literature nor
the Google Play Store provides systematic or automated solutions for this task.
To bridge this gap, we propose a novel assessment methodology that exploits a multi-prompt Large Language
Models (LLMs) pipeline to i) extract all the declarations, defined as textual statements that explicitly describe data
collection or sharing practices associated with specific user data, from both the privacy policy and the DSS, and ii)
identify the omitted declarations, i.e., declarations contained in the PP but not covered in the corresponding DSS. In
addition, we implemented the methodology in a fully-automated tool, called PolicyGapper, to detect such omissions
in Android apps published on the Google Play Store.
Leveraging PolicyGapper, we conducted a study to evaluate the consistency of the Android privacy ecosystem and
assess the effectiveness of our approach. Specifically, we addressed the following research questions:
• RQ1: Can PolicyGapper effectively identify omitted declarations between the PP and the DSS?
• RQ2: Which types of omitted declarations appear most frequently during the analysis?
• RQ3: Which Data Categories are most impacted by omitted declarations among the Google Play Store app
Categories?
To answer these questions, we tested PolicyGapper on 330 top apps, collected in Q3 2025, across all the available
categories of the Google Play Store. PolicyGapper was able to report 2,689 issues, corresponding to omitted Data
Types declared in the PP but not in the DSS, revealing that more than 95% of the apps analyzed contained verified
omitted declarations. We manually reviewed 10% of the privacy policies to validate the results. Across three runs, the
average Precision is 0.75, Accuracy 0.69, Recall 0.77, and F1-score 0.76.
At the end of the experimental assessment, in the second half of January, we responsibly disclosed our findings
to the developers of the affected applications via email. The goal of this disclosure was to inform developers of the
identified inconsistencies and enable corrective actions, allowing them to update the DSS to better reflect the practices
described in the PP. Within the limited time elapsed since disclosure, some developers from different companies have
already responded, acknowledging our report.
We further plan to share aggregated results and methodological insights with Google, with the objective of
informing potential improvements to the Google Play app review and compliance processes. Lastly, to promote
replicability and adoption of the tool and methodology, we released the open-source tool, the used datasets, and results
at the following link1.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the necessary background, followed by a review
of related work in Section 3. Section 4 details our proposed methodology, while Section 5 describes the system
implementation. Section 6 presents the experimental evaluation and analyzes the results. Section 7 discusses the results
obtained and the limitations of PolicyGapper. Finally, Section 8 summarizes our contributions and outlines directions
for future research.
1https://github.com/Mobile-IoT-Security-Lab/PolicyGapper, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19628493
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
2. Background
This section summarizes the terminology and concepts required to understand the content of the rest of the paper.
Throughout this paper we adopt Google’s terminology for data types, data categories, and disclosure constraints,
as defined in the official Google Play Data Safety documentation.
2.1. Google Data Safety Section.
The DSS is the standardized framework used by the Google Play Store to disclose how applications handle
user data. It appears as a dedicated “Data safety” panel on each app’s detail page. Developers complete this panel
before submitting the app for review. They specify the data categories collected or shared (e.g., personal information,
location, app activity), along with their data types and purposes (e.g., app functionality, analytics, advertising). They
must also declare whether security practices are implemented, such as encryption in transit and user-requested data
deletion. This information is displayed to users before installation (as shown in Figure 1). The DSS structures privacy-
related information across a four-layer hierarchy: Privacy Practices, Data Categories, Data Types, and Purposes [24].
Developers must specify each layer when declaring data collection or sharing. They select the applicable privacy
practice, identify the data categories involved, specify the data types collected, and declare the processing purposes.
At the first level, as shown in Figure 2, Google Play Store defines three main Privacy Practices:
i) Data Collection. According to Google’s official documentation [16], “collection” refers to any transmission of
user data from an app to a destination outside the user’s device. Data transmitted by integrated SDKs or libraries must
always be reported as collected, regardless of whether it is sent to the developer’s or a third party’s server. When the
app controls the code executed within a WebView (i.e., a browsing window integrated into the app), any user data
gathered there must also be declared. In contrast, data produced from independent user browsing in windows outside
the perimeter of the app (e.g., when a user opens a link in the browser of the mobile phone) does not require disclosure.
Google Play explicitly excludes certain data access scenarios from the definition of “collection” when the data cannot
be accessed by the developer or linked to a specific user. These exemptions include: (a) on-device processing, where
data is processed locally without transmission; (b) end-to-end encryption, where data is unreadable by the developer or
intermediaries; (c) ephemeral processing, where data is briefly stored in memory for a real-time action and immediately
discarded without being logged; and (d) anonymization, where data is stripped of all identifiers such that it can no longer
be associated with an individual. In contrast, pseudonymization retains a linkable ID and must still be declared.
ii) Data Sharing. Google Play’s Data Safety framework distinguishes between first and third parties. The first party
is the main entity responsible for processing data collected through the app—typically the organization listed as the
developer on Google Play—and must ensure users clearly understand who handles their data. A third party refers to
any organization other than the first party or its designated service providers. The term “sharing” refers to the transfer
of user data collected from an app to a third party, whether off-device or on-device. Off-device sharing occurs, for
instance, when data is first transmitted to the developer’s server and subsequently forwarded to a third party. Sharing
can also happen on-device, when data is transmitted directly from one app to another. Likewise, when third-party
SDKs integrated into an app send user data directly to external servers, or when a WebView under the app’s control
transmits user data, such activities constitute data sharing. By contrast, data exchanges resulting from independent user
browsing in windows outside the perimeter of the app do not need to be disclosed. Certain data transfers fall outside the
definition of sharing. These include transfers to a service provider acting strictly on behalf of the developer and under
its instructions; transfers conducted for legal obligations or official requests; user-initiated transfers or those made with
clear in-app consent consistent with the User Data Policy; and those involving fully anonymized data that cannot be
linked to any identifiable individual.
iii) Security Practices. Enable developers to showcase privacy protections through three optional tags: Encrypted
in Transit, Data Deletion Option, and Review against Global Security Standards.
The second and third levels define the user data covered by the DSS, specifying what types of data are collected
or shared by an application. In the current version, this information is organized into 14 high-level data categories,
each further divided into 38 specific data types, providing a fine-grained taxonomy of user data as defined by Google
Play [16]. The final level defines the Purposes, which describe the intended use of the collected or shared data
and provide context on why the data is processed. These purposes include App functionality, Analytics, Developer
communications, Advertising or marketing, Fraud prevention, security and compliance, Personalization, and Account
management.
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
2.2. Google App Submission Review.
In order to publish an app on the Google Play Store, developers are required to complete the DSS in the Google
Play Console and provide a link to their PP. As stated in Google Play documentation [16], “even if your app does not
collect any user data, you must still submit a form and provide a link to a privacy policy.” Moreover, the PP URL must
point to a stable, publicly accessible, read-only webpage (i.e., not publicly editable) [17]. Finally, Google requires that
DSS disclosures, compiled by developers, are consistent with the app’s privacy policy, i.e., the DSS should be aligned
with the PP [16].
To support developers in complying with these requirements, Google provides a set of tools integrated into the Play
Console ecosystem. In particular, the Policy Status module [9] acts as a centralized dashboard for policy compliance
monitoring, allowing developers to review enforcement actions (e.g., app rejections or removals) and track deadlines
for newly introduced policy requirements. However, it primarily provides a reactive view of compliance issues after
they have been detected, rather than proactively assisting developers in producing consistent documentation.
Despite its usefulness, this solutions do not fully address the DSS–PP consistency problem. In particular, while
they support compliance monitoring and enforcement, they do not directly assess the semantic consistency between
the structured DSS labels and the unstructured legal text of the PP. Consequently, an automated approach capable of
interpreting natural language to audit and enforce alignment between PP and DSS remains necessary.
2.3. Privacy Policy.
In the mobile ecosystem, applications act as digital services subject to stringent data protection regulations (e.g.,
GDPR, CCPA) that mandate the transparent disclosure of data handling practices. Consequently, a PP is not merely a
legal formality but a mandatory requirement for app distribution on platforms like the Google Play Store. This document
legally binds the developer to specific standards, detailing the extent of data collection, the purposes of data processing,
and third-party sharing, and serves as the authoritative reference for user consent and regulatory compliance.
Figure 1: Example of a Data Safety
Section (DSS) for an application on
the Google Play Store.
Figure 2: Hierarchy of the Google Play Store Data Safety Section (DSS),
adapted from Khandelwal et al. [24].
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
3. Related Work
We categorize the related work into three primary domains: (i) approaches verifying consistency between app
behavior and privacy documentation, (ii) single-artifact analyses of PP, and (iii) baseline measurements of privacy
label correctness.
Regarding the first domain, several works focus on identifying discrepancies between code or app behaviour and PP,
DSS, or GDPR requirements. In particular, Google provides Checks [8], a platform designed to support developers in
assessing privacy compliance. However, the service is currently released in beta and has not received significant updates
since May 2024, suggesting a limited level of maturity and maintenance. Checks operates as a separate service that can
be connected to an application to perform automated analyses. The analysis is limited to applications published on the
Google Play Store and accessible only to their respective developers. It inspects app characteristics such as permissions
and network traffic to identify potential data collection and sharing behaviours, and applies natural language processing
(NLP) techniques to analyze the Privacy Policy. Based on these analyses, it provides suggestions to assist developers
in completing the Data Safety Section (DSS). However, its results are not part of the official Google Play review
process and are not shared with the Play Store. Moreover, the tool does not explicitly perform a comparison between
DSS disclosures and the PP, thus leaving the consistency verification task largely to developers. 3PDroid [29] verifies
whether an application invokes APIs related to personal data collection or sharing before the user has given consent
by accepting the PP. Alecci et al. [2] employ LLMs to verify whether Android applications comply with privacy
requirements derived from the GDPR by analyzing their Smali code. Baalous et al. [6] verify if the application’s activity
names are compliant with the privacy labels of the DSS. GNChecker [10] employ a combination of Static Application
Security Testing (SAST), Dynamic Application Security Testing (DAST), and the use of LLMs. While it innovatively
uses LLMs to extract privacy statements, its primary goal is to validate these statements against technical data flows
captured via static and dynamic analysis. Similarly, Arkalakis et al. [5] build an automated analysis framework that
dynamically executes and analyzes applications so as to uncover discrepancies between the applications’ behavior and
the data practices that have been reported in their DSS.
Although these works are essential for detecting privacy leaks and contribute to improving transparency by
identifying mismatches between application behavior and declared data practices, they address a different dimension
of transparency violations. In particular, they focus on behavioral transparency, i.e., whether the actual data flows of
an application are consistent with what is declared in the PP or DSS.
However, they do not explicitly detect cross-document inconsistencies between the full description of data practices
in the PP and the summarized disclosures in the DSS. As a result, even when an application’s behavior is correctly
aligned with its declared practices, discrepancies between PP and DSS may still persist, potentially leading to
incomplete or misleading disclosures for end users.
Moreover, these approaches face intrinsic scalability and accuracy challenges. Static analysis techniques can be hin-
dered by anti-debugging and anti-repackaging mechanisms (e.g., code obfuscation and control-flow transformations),
while dynamic analysis often suffers from limited code coverage. In practice, dynamic techniques (e.g., fuzzing) can
only explore the portions of code that are actually executed, typically covering no more than 30% of the application [1],
which may result in missed sensitive data flows and false negatives.
The second domain focuses on single-artifact analysis, effectively identifying internal contradictions or legal gaps
but failing to verify the cross-document alignment required by app stores. For instance, Polisis [18] introduced a deep
learning framework to extract fine-grained data practices from privacy policy text, allowing for automated querying
and the generation of simplified visual summaries for users. PolicyLint [4] analyzes over 11k apps to detect internal
contradictions within Privacy Policies that suggest misleading statements. Similarly, Xie et al. [30] use LLMs to
evaluate website privacy policies against GDPR and US state laws. While these approaches ensure that the PP is
internally consistent or legally compliant, they cannot detect transparency violations where the PP is misrepresented
by the summarized disclosure in the DSS. Our system bridges this gap by performing a cross-verification between
these two distinct artifacts.
Finally, the third domain involves baseline measurements of privacy labels. Khandelwal et al. [23] pioneered this
area by examining over a million apps using BERT-based classifiers to detect potential inconsistencies. Subsequent
works extended this line of work. One study tracked the longitudinal evolution of DSS, revealing widespread
underreporting of ad/analytics SDKs [24], while another identified significant discrepancies in self-reported practices
across Android and iOS platforms [22]. However, these approaches rely on standard supervised learning, which limits
their scope to predefined categories and keyword matching. This method often struggles with the ambiguous legal
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
language found in modern policies. Our research advances this domain by replacing classical classification with the
context-aware semantic reasoning of LLMs. This shift enables a deeper validation, identifying intricate discrepancies,
such as conditional data sharing clauses, that escape conventional statistical methods. Furthermore, unlike prior studies,
which did not release their artifacts, we provide open access to our tool and dataset to support reproducibility and future
research.
4. Methodology
We propose a novel methodology based on the combination of multi-prompt LLM analyses. The methodology is
applicable to Android applications published on the Google Play Store without access to the application package or any
additional information. It is composed of five cooperating modules, orchestrated according to the workflow depicted
in Figure 3.
Package Name
Data Safety 
Extractor
Privacy Policy
Extractor
Data Safety
Section
Privacy Policy Page
LLM Analyzer
LLM Pre-Processing
UserData
 Analysis 
Prompt
TechnicalData 
Analysis
Prompt
Location
Analysis 
Prompt
Pre-Processed
Privacy Policy Page
Collection Statement
Pre-Processed
Privacy Policy Page
Share Statement
UserData
Analysis 
Prompt
TechnicalData
 Analysis  
Prompt
Location
Analysis
Prompt
Collection
Share
Scraper Module
(1)
(3)
LLM Post-Processing
Omitted/Excluded 
Collection
Declarations
Post-Processed
Share Constraint
Analysis Prompt
Collection Constraint
Analysis Prompt
Omitted/Excluded 
Share
Declarations
Post-Processed
(4)
Refined Omitted
Collection 
Declarations
Refined Omitted 
Share 
Declarations
Share Statement
Analysis Prompt
Collection Statement
Analysis Prompt
Omitted 
UserData 
Declarations
Omitted
 TechnicalData 
Declarations
Omitted
 Location 
Declarations
Omitted
 UserData 
Declarations
Omitted
 TechnicalData 
Declarations
Omitted
Location
Declarations
Collection
Share
(2)
Figure 3: Workflow of the proposed methodology for detecting inconsistencies between an app’s PP and DSS.
1) Scraper Module. The Scraper Module is responsible for retrieving the PP and the DSS associated with a given
package name from the Google Play Store. It consists of two submodules: (i) the Data Safety Extractor, which retrieves
the DSS content, and (ii) the Privacy Policy Extractor, which obtains the PP starting from the link provided on the
DSS.
2) LLM Pre-Processing Module. Once the Privacy Policy Extractor correctly extracts the PP of the given package
name, the LLM Pre-Processing Module extracts the text statements of the PP that are relevant to data collection and
data sharing. This module is executed through two dedicated prompts: (i) the Share Statement Analysis Prompt and
(ii) the Collection Statement Analysis Prompt. These two prompts are responsible for instructing the LLM to extract
from the PP only the text blocks that describe the collection and sharing of personal user data (i.e., the declarations),
and to copy them word-for-word without modification. We introduce this module for two main reasons: i) PPs often
span dozens of pages; isolating only the statements relevant to data collection and sharing practices of the mobile
app significantly reduces the input size for the subsequent analysis, enabling a more focused and cost-effective LLM
evaluation; ii) the text extraction may yield poorly formatted outputs due to layout or encoding artifacts (e.g., broken
symbols or misplaced characters). Through a dedicated preprocessing prompt, we transform these extracted sections
into clean, interpretable text. As a result, the main analysis operates on compact and coherent inputs, minimizing noise
and improving the overall robustness of the pipeline.
3) LLM Analyzer Module. The LLM Analyzer is the core module responsible for comparing: (i) the pre-processed
PP statements related to data collection and sharing, and (ii) the DSS extracted from Google Play. Its goal is to
detect omitted declarations in the DSS, identifying cases in which specific data types are mentioned in the PP but
not declared in the DSS. The analysis relies on a set of structured prompts explicitly designed to guide the LLM in
performing a compliance-oriented evaluation. Each prompt instructs the model to act as a privacy auditor specialized
in Android applications, taking as input both the results of LLM Pre-Processing Module and the DSS. Depending on
the data to analyze and for what purpose, i.e., collection or sharing, the LLM is prompted to identify all explicit or
implicit mentions of specific data types within the PP and to verify their corresponding declarations in the DSS. The
module applies exclusion constraints derived from Google Play’s official documentation, as described in Section 2.1, to
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
reduce false positives due to contextual or technical exceptions, such as on-device processing exemptions. The module
considers all data types defined in the official Google Play Data Safety documentation. At the time of writing, the
documentation specifies 38 Data Types grouped into 14 Data Categories.
As output, the module produces two reports, summarizing potential omissions and inconsistencies separately for the
collection and sharing practices. Each report covers all 14 data categories, providing a complete overview of undeclared
or mismatched data practices. The output structure, as shown in Listing 1 consists of the following elements:
• data_type: The candidate data type omitted in the DSS but present in the PP;
• policy_reference: Exact excerpt from the privacy policy demonstrating the omission of the declared
data_type from the corresponding DSS entry;
• lang: language in which the PP is written.
Listing 1: LLM Analyzer JSON output structure.
{
" omitted_declarations ": [
{
"data_type ": "Data
type",
" policy_reference ": "Exact
excerpt
from
the
privacy
policy",
"lang ": "PP
language"
}
]
}
Once the LLM Analyzer Module completes its analysis, it consolidates the results into two unified artifacts: one
for collection and one for sharing. This ensures that all candidate omissions are evaluated under a consistent set of
constraints defined by the official Google Play Data Safety documentation, as described in Section 2.
As output, the module returns: (i) a single JSON file for potentially omitted sharing declarations, and (ii) a single
JSON file for potentially omitted collection declarations. These files constitute the input for the post-processing phase.
5) LLM Post-Processing Module. The final stage of the pipeline is the LLM Post-Processing Module. This
component refines and validates the outputs produced by the LLM Analyzer, ensuring that each candidate omission
represents a genuine inconsistency between the PP and the DSS.
We introduce this module to mitigate the known issues of hallucinations in LLMs’ results [19], where models
generate semantically plausible but factually inconsistent associations, such as linking unrelated data types like location
sharing to payment info [11]. The module operates through two dedicated prompts: (i) the Sharing Constraint Analysis
Prompt, and (ii) the Collection Constraint Analysis Prompt. These prompts instruct the LLM to re-evaluate the
Analyzer results sequentially: first assessing the semantic coherence of each association (e.g., if the policy mentions
cloud synchronization but the result identifies the data type as “Device information,” the entry is marked inconsistent
and discarded); then removing duplicate entries; and finally verifying compliance with the official DSS disclosure
constraints. Specifically, the model checks whether the declared data type and its policy reference are consistent.
Ultimately, the LLM Post-Processing Module classifies the refined results into two categories. The first, omitted
declarations, represents confirmed inconsistencies where the Privacy Policy declares data collection, sharing, or other
practices not reflected in the corresponding DSS entry. The second, excluded declarations, captures initially detected
inconsistencies that, after post-processing validation against DSS disclosure rules, are identified as false positives or
non-violations. These cases arise when a finding appears as an omission at first glance, but either (i) its policy reference
pertains to a different data-handling purpose that does not require DSS disclosure (e.g., the result marks “Approximate
Location” as omitted, but the related text concerns “User Payment Information”), or (ii) the data type and policy
reference fall outside Google Play’s defined DSS disclosure constraints and therefore do not require declaration.
The output structure in Listing 2 is similar to that of Listing 1, with the addition of an excluded declarations section.
This section provides, for each exclusion, the underlying reason, including: (i) reason_of_removal, a keyword
summarizing the reason, and (ii) justification, which briefly explains the reason for removal.
Listing 2: LLM Post-Processing JSON output structure.
{
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
" omitted_declarations ": [
{
"data_type ": "Data
type",
" policy_reference ": "Exact
excerpt
from
the
privacy
policy",
"lang ": "PP
language"
}
],
" excluded_declarations ": [
{
"data_type ": "Data
type",
" policy_reference ": "Exact
excerpt
from
the
privacy
policy",
" reason_of_removal ": "Keyword
explaining
why
Analyzer
finding
is not a true
DSS
omission",
" justification ": "Brief
reasoning
why not a true
omission , referencing
DSS
categories",
"lang ": "PP
language"
}
]
}
5. Implementation
In this section, we explain how we implemented PolicyGapper and the reason behind the technical choices.
Scraper Module. The scraper module is composed of the Data Safety Extractor, a Node.js component that relies on
the open-source google-play-scraper tool available on GitHub.2.Given a package name, it extracts all the details
present in the DSS and stores them in a structured JSON file. The Privacy Policy Extractor is a Python-based module
that takes as input the Privacy Policy URL identified by the Data Safety Extractor and retrieves the corresponding
policy content. The module launches a headless browser, sets a custom User-Agent to emulate realistic user behavior,
and navigates to the specified URL. After a configurable waiting period of 3 seconds—introduced to allow dynamic
JavaScript content to fully load—the rendered HTML content is collected.
A key challenge in this process is the presence of cookie consent banners, which may obscure or block
access to the Privacy Policy content. To address this issue, we adopted a twofold strategy. First, we defined
a set of heuristic rules based on commonly observed consent elements, including keywords and HTML selec-
tors (e.g., button:has-text(’ACCEPT’), button:has-text(’AGREE’),button:has-text(’REJECT’)). Sec-
ond, we evaluated the effectiveness of browser extensions designed to automatically handle cookie banners. In
particular, we considered I don’t care about cookies3, uBlock4 and Consent-O-Matic5. The evaluation was conducted
on a randomly selected sample of 20 applications, with the goal of assessing their ability to consistently expose the PP
content without manual intervention. The results indicated that I don’t care about cookies achieved higher effectiveness
in bypassing or removing cookie banners across diverse websites. To further validate this choice, we extended the
evaluation of I don’t care about cookies to the full dataset of 330 applications. The results show that, in the vast
majority of cases, the extension successfully handled cookie consent banners without requiring manual interaction.
Specifically, testing the extension on 330 apps, only 10 of them (approximately 3%) still presented residual cookie
banners that could potentially interfere with the extraction process. This confirms the robustness of the adopted solution
in real-world conditions, while also highlighting a limited set of edge cases where additional handling strategies may
still be required. Based on this empirical assessment, we integrated this extension into the Chromium-based scraping
pipeline.
However, this component is mainly meant to support our experimental campaign and automatically collect the
privacy policy for many apps. The market provider who needs to check apps before accepting them, or development
teams willing to check their apps, typically have direct access to privacy policies with no complication caused by
cookie banners.
2https://github.com/walkerliu01/google-play-scraper
3https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/i-dont-care-about-cookies/fihnjjcciajhdojfnbdddfaoknhalnja?pli=1
4https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/ublock/epcnnfbjfcgphgdmggkamkmgojdagdnn?hl=en
5https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/consent-o-matic/mdjildafknihdffpkfmmpnpoiajfjnjd
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
LLM Analysis Modules. All LLM Modules, namely LLM Pre-Processing, LLM Analyzer, and LLM Post-
Processing, are implemented as Python scripts. For each module, we leverage a Zero-shot Prompting strategy, as
defined by Zhou et al. [32]. Regarding the choice of the LLM, we compare the following state-of-the-art models:
i) Gemini 2.5-pro ii) deepseek-v3.1:671b-cloud iii) qwen3:8b. In addition, we conducted an extensive prompt
engineering study to identify the most effective prompting strategy for our pipeline. We report the results of our
analysis in Section 6. Listings 3-4-5 in Appendix A report the structure of the resulting prompts for pre-processing,
analysis, and post-processing, in accordance with the strategies discussed in Section 4.
6. Experimental Campaign and Analysis Results
To answer the research questions introduced in Section 1 (RQ1–RQ3), we adopt a two-phase experimental
methodology. In both phases, our analysis operates exclusively on application package names and publicly available
metadata collected from the Google Play Store. Package names are automatically identified and extracted from the
official Google Play Store pages using a custom Selenium-based script; no application binaries are downloaded or
analyzed.
In the first phase, we conduct a pilot study on a benchmark of 10 top-ranked Google Play Store applications. This
phase is used to systematically tune the experimental parameters of PolicyGapper, including prompt configurations and
the choice of the underlying LLM. The objective of this pilot is to select a stable and effective configuration, which
serves as the baseline for all subsequent experiments.
In the second phase, we apply PolicyGapper with the finalized configuration to a large-scale empirical analysis
(RQ1). We collect the package names of the top-ranked application in Q3 2025 from each of the 33 Google Play
Store categories, resulting in a dataset of 330 applications. This phase enables a quantitative assessment of omission
prevalence across both individual data types (RQ2) and aggregated data categories (RQ3). The experimental campaign
was carried 

[…middle truncated for length…]

Personal Info (total TP: 188) being the most impacted category, followed by App Activity (total TP: 125),
Location (total TP: 75), and Device or Other IDs (total TP: 66), as shown in Figure 4 in Appendix B.
Regarding the Data Categories most impacted by collection omissions, a similar pattern is observed. Personal Info
(total TP: 503) is again the most impacted category, followed by App Activity (total TP: 272), Location (total TP: 235),
and Financial Info (total TP: 228), as shown in Figure 5 in Appendix B.
RQ3: Which Data Categories are most impacted by omitted declarations among the Google Play Store App
Categories?
Omitted declarations are most prevalent in Personal Info, App Activity, and Location, which consistently rank as
the most impacted categories for both data collection and data sharing. This pattern indicates that the Data Safety
Section currently fails to provide sufficient transparency into the most sensitive user data—specifically, attributes
that enable fine-grained user profiling and identification.
6.6. Threats to Validity
Here we discuss the threats to the validity of our experimental campaign and how we addressed them:
Threats to internal validity impacting empirical results are primarily related to the metrics adopted to answer the
research questions. To mitigate this threat, we adopted standard metrics (Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and F1-score)
commonly used in classification tasks, ensuring reproducibility and comparability with similar studies. Additionally,
the non-deterministic nature of LLMs represents a significant internal validity threat, as identical prompts may yield
different outputs across runs. We addressed this issue by conducting three independent executions on 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚, a subset
of 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒, demonstrating consistent performance with an average Precision of 0.73, Accuracy of 0.64, Recall of 0.73,
and F1-score of 0.73 across runs 2 and 3, compared to 0.80, 0.77, 0.85, and 0.82 in run 1, respectively. Furthermore,
manual validation of the applications in 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚allowed us to accurately identify TPs, FPs, TNs, and FNs, thus
reducing potential measurement bias.
Threats to external validity, impacting the generalization of our findings, are mainly due to the scope of the
application datasets selected for our analysis. We mitigated these threats by considering two datasets, 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒and
its subset 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚, both of which include applications from all Google Play Store categories. However, our findings
are limited to Android applications with publicly accessible PP web pages, and with available DSS on the Google
Play Store. The methodology has not been evaluated on other mobile ecosystems (e.g., Apple’s Privacy Labels), paid
applications, or PPs written in languages other than English. Additionally, our analysis relies on Gemini 2.5 Pro as
the primary LLM, and results may vary when adopting different models or prompting strategies. Further experiments
would be required to extend our results beyond the considered datasets, particularly to other platforms and alternative
privacy compliance frameworks.
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
Data Types
# TP Omitted Declaration
Approximate Location
216
Web Browsing History
153
Email Address
144
Name
136
App Interactions
135
Device and Other IDs
117
User Payment Info
115
Purchase History
115
Other User Generated Content
115
Photos
106
Table 5
Top 10 data types most affected by collection and sharing omissions. For each data type, we report the number of apps
for which the Privacy Policy indicates data collection while the Data Safety Section omits it on 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒.
7. Discussion and Limitations
Our implementation faces several practical challenges arising from both the inherent behavior of LLMs and
the diverse, often ambiguous ways in which PPs are written. The first and most prominent challenge relates to the
terminology and legal language used in privacy policies, which is frequently complex, exception-rich, and context-
dependent. In particular, ambiguities in the description of data sharing practices often complicate the interpretation of
disclosures. For example, transfers to service providers—entities processing data on behalf of developers under their
direct instructions—are exempt from disclosure as “sharing” under Google Play’s rules. Such regulatory subtleties are
difficult to capture automatically and can lead the LLM to misclassify compliant disclosures as omissions, thereby
increasing the number of false positives.
Beyond linguistic and regulatory complexities, the non-deterministic nature of LLMs introduces additional
variability in the analysis results. Even when queried with identical prompts and with the temperature set to 0,
models may produce different interpretations or classifications, which in turn affects reproducibility and confidence
in large-scale evaluations. To explicitly assess this effect, during the validation phase we executed the full pipeline
three independent times on 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚and evaluated the average performance across runs. This approach allowed us to
quantify variability and provide evidence of its potential, while in a real deployment scenario, additional mitigation
strategies could be adopted, such as performing majority voting over several independent generations.
Additional challenges were observed in real-world deployment scenarios. For instance, apps developed by a well-
known film production company, with more than 500 million installations, exhibit multiple omitted personal and
financial data declarations while relying on a single PP shared across multiple products. This practice causes confusion
when the analyzer searches for omissions specific to one app but encounters data practices related to others. Similarly,
a popular game-based learning application with more than 50 million installations references an obsolete PP link in
the Google Play Store, despite maintaining an up-to-date policy on its official website. Specifically, it points to a web
page last updated in 2017, leading to inconsistent or outdated data mappings. Moreover, PPs that conflate mobile and
web platforms—for example, policies that collectively refer to both under the term “Website”—introduce numerous
false negatives, since our methodology explicitly excludes data collected or shared exclusively through website usage.
We also encountered cases where PPs described only the website version of a service, leaving the app’s practices
unspecified, as well as cases where the PP was inaccessible, preventing our scraper from retrieving the content. In a
limited number of cases, the PP Scraper was not able to fully close cookie banners, leaving parts of the Privacy Policy
partially obscured and potentially affecting the LLM-based analysis. However, as discussed in Section 5, this issue was
largely mitigated through the integration of automated handling strategies, and thus only impacts a small set of edge
cases.
These real-world inconsistencies highlight the difficulty of performing automated PP–DSS consistency validation
at scale and underline the need for more standardized and machine-readable privacy documentation.
Despite these challenges, PolicyGapper effectively detects omitted declarations in widely used applications. In
fact, most apps in 𝑠𝑒𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒fall within the range of 1 million to 100 million installations, with a significant peak in the
10 million+ category (105 apps). PolicyGapper also identifies omissions in popular streaming and social networking
applications with more than 1 billion installations. Ultimately, the detection of undeclared practices in such widely
used applications highlights the practical relevance and impact of our approach, as the privacy of millions of users
may be affected by inconsistencies between PPs and DSS disclosures at scale.
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
8. Conclusion
This work tackles the problem of omitted declarations PPs and DSSs by proposing a multi-prompt LLM-based
methodology. Building on this methodology, we introduce PolicyGapper, the first LLM-driven tool designed to
automatically identify omitted declarations between PPs and DSSs. The results obtained on real-world Android
applications demonstrate the applicability and effectiveness of the proposed approach, highlighting a still largely
unresolved issue in the Google Play ecosystem. Across 330 applications, we identified 2,689 omitted declarations,
with more than 95% of the analyzed apps exhibiting at least one omission. Moreover, our evaluation confirms the
feasibility of the methodology, achieving an average Precision of 0.75 across three independent runs.
From a practical perspective, PolicyGapper can assist developers in verifying the consistency between PPs and
DSSs prior to app submission, reducing the risk of rejections, removals, or enforcement actions related to privacy
non-compliance. Furthermore, the proposed methodology could support automated checks within the Google Play
Console, helping identify discrepancies between the two documents and notifying developers of missing Data Types in
the DSS. As future work, we plan to extend the current methodology to support Apple’s Privacy Labels by adapting the
data-type taxonomy and refining prompting strategies in accordance with platform-specific guidelines. Furthermore,
we aim to extend discrepancy detection to the app’s actual behaviour, e.g., by analysing whether declared security
practices are effectively implemented or by assessing the consistency of declared data-processing purposes. Finally,
from a methodological perspective, future empirical evaluations will incorporate a larger number of execution runs
to provide a more robust statistical characterization of the model’s behaviour and further mitigate the inherent non-
determinism of LLM outputs.
Ethical Considerations
Stakeholder Identification and Impacts. We organize this section using a stakeholder-based analysis. We distin-
guish between direct stakeholders—those who create, analyze, or manage mobile apps—and indirect stakeholders,
specifically the end-users. Direct stakeholders include our research team, app developers, and marketplace operators
(e.g., Google Play). Indirect stakeholders represent the millions of users who depend on accurate privacy labels, as
well as regulators (e.g., GDPR enforcement bodies) who oversee compliance.
Research Team. Our study does not involve human subjects, physical experiments, or the collection of private
user data. We focus exclusively on analyzing public documents: PPs and DSSs. All analyzed materials are publicly
accessible documents provided by developers on the Google Play Store. We acknowledge that automated analysis relies
on LLMs, which can be non-deterministic. To ensure robustness, we mitigated this limitation through rigorous manual
validation and by performing multiple test runs. Our analysis does not infer, collect, or reconstruct individual user
behavior, nor does it process personal data beyond what is explicitly documented in PPs and DSSs.
Mobile Ecosystem Stakeholders. Our methodology impacts two key groups within the ecosystem:
• Developers: Developers can use PolicyGapper to pre-validate their apps before submission, reducing the risk
of rejection or penalties. We are aware that automated tools can generate false positives, which might unfairly
harm a developer’s reputation. To mitigate this risk, we anonymized the results in this paper and followed a
responsible disclosure process, contacting 53 developers privately to verify our findings. We did not publicly
identify affected applications or developers, nor did we frame the reported inconsistencies as confirmed legal
violations, but rather as documentation mismatches requiring human review.
• Marketplace Operators: Store operators (e.g., Google) can use this methodology to improve their existing
review tools (such as Checks [8]). This allows them to move beyond simple static analysis and perform semantic
consistency checks between the legal text and the declarative labels.
Privacy Community and Society. We align our work with core ethical principles:
• Beneficence: We propose a methodology to automate the detection of missing privacy disclosures. By helping
users understand data practices without needing to parse complex legal texts, we support transparency and
informed consent.
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
• Respect for Persons: We respect the intellectual property of the analyzed apps and cite all prior work appro-
priately. Furthermore, our interactions with developers were conducted professionally, prioritizing constructive
remediation over public exposure.
• Justice: We are releasing PolicyGapper as open-source software to reduce disparities in resources. This allows
smaller developers and researchers—who often lack large legal teams—to perform the same level of compliance
verification as major corporations.
• Respect for Law and Public Interest: Our research promotes compliance with regulations like GDPR and app
store policies. By identifying discrepancies, we contribute to a more trustworthy digital ecosystem where privacy
labels accurately reflect legal obligations.
Publication Impacts. Our methodology may influence future research into LLM-based compliance checking. To
reduce misuse or misinterpretation, we have clearly documented the limitations of our approach, specifically regarding
the non-determinism of the results and the necessity of manual ground-truth validation.
Potential Harms Analysis. We identified and mitigated specific risks:
• Risk to Developers: There is a possibility that our tool could be misused to unfairly criticize developers for
minor errors or ambiguities. We mitigate this by clarifying that PolicyGapper highlights inconsistencies in
documentation, which is not the same as a legal violation.
• Operational Impact: To protect the websites hosting privacy policies, we configured our scraper with strict
rate-limiting (one request every 357 seconds). This ensures we do not overload or crash smaller servers during
data collection. We further ensured that our data collection process respected publicly accessible endpoints and
did not attempt to bypass access controls, authentication mechanisms, or platform safeguards.
• LLM Hallucinations: Since LLMs can produce incorrect outputs (hallucinations), there is a risk of false positives.
Therefore, we present PolicyGapper as an assistive tool for human experts, rather than a standalone decision-
maker, and we explicitly discourage its use as an automated enforcement or compliance authority without human
oversight.
Decision to Conduct and Publish. The main goal of this project is to connect the complexity of privacy laws with
the simplicity of privacy labels. We proceeded with this work because we found that helping users understand their
data and assisting developers with compliance is more valuable than the minor risk of errors and before publishing, we
verified our tool’s metrics through manual checks. We are now sharing our code and data because we believe openness
is key to making automated privacy analysis reproducible and accountable. We believe that transparently documenting
both the strengths and limitations of our approach is essential to enable responsible adoption and to prevent misuse of
automated privacy analysis tools.
Open Science
To promote transparency and reproducibility, we provide open access to PolicyGapper, including the datasets
used in our analyses and all experimental results, available at https://github.com/Mobile-IoT-Security-Lab/
PolicyGapper.
The released artifacts are distributed under a non-commercial research license, allowing use for academic and
research purposes.
To facilitate reproducibility across heterogeneous environments, the project includes full Docker support, enabling
the execution of the entire analysis pipeline with minimal setup effort.
Data Availability
The data and code supporting the findings of this study are publicly available at https://github.com/
Mobile-IoT-Security-Lab/PolicyGapper.
Ferrari et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 22

PolicyGapper: Automated Detection of PP–DSS Inconsistencies
The repository includes: (i) the list of analyzed mobile applications, (ii) all the PP and DSS analyzed, (iii) the
collected metadata and experimental results, (iv) the prompts and outputs generated by the LLM-based analysis, and
(iv) the scripts and Docker environment required to reproduce the experiments.
All results reported in this paper can be reproduced by following the instructions provided in the repository.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit
sectors.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation
process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT, Grammarly in order to: Grammar and spelling
check, Paraphrase and reword. After using these tools, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take
full responsibility for the content of the published article.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Luca Ferrari: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Writing – original draft. Billel Habbati:
Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Meriem Guerar: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.
Mariano Ceccato: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Luca Verderame:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.