PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount
System
for Blockchain Wallets
Jay Yu1,2, Shunfan Zhou3, Hang Yin3, and Brian Seong4,5
1 Stanford University jyu01@stanford.edu
2 Pantera Capital jay@panteracapital.com
3 Phala Network {shelvenzhou,hangyin}@phala.network
4 Polygon Labs bseong@polygon.technology
5 Chainless Company brian@chainless.company
Abstract. Blockchain wallets conventionally follow an ownership model
where possession of a private key grants unilateral control. However, this
assumption is brittle for emerging settings such as AI agent wallets, or-
ganizational custody, and enterprise payroll, where multiple actors must
coordinate without exposing secrets or leaking internal activity.
We present PASS, a Provenanced Access Subaccount System
that replaces role or identity-based control with provenance-based con-
trol: assets can only be used by subaccounts that can trace custody back
to a valid deposit. A simple Inbox–Outbox mechanism ensures all exter-
nal actions have verifiable lineage, while internal transfers remain private
and indistinguishable from ordinary EOAs.
We formalize PASS in Lean 4 and prove core invariants, including
privacy of internal transfers, asset accessibility, and provenance integrity.
We implement a prototype with enclave backends on AWS Nitro Enclaves
and dstack Intel TDX, integrate with WalletConnect, and benchmark
throughput across wallet operations. These results show that provenance-
based wallets are both implementable and efficient. PASS bridges today’s
gap between strict self-custody and flexible shared access, advancing the
design space for practical, privacy-preserving custody.
1
Introduction
Cryptocurrency wallets conventionally assume that whoever holds the private
key has permanent and total control of the address, and casts publicly readable,
gas-consuming blockchain transactions. However, this model struggles to adapt
to emerging blockchain scenarios:
1. AI and Smart Agent Transactions. AI agents increasingly manage crypto
assets [27,39] and require bounded authority and access guardrails for users’
asset security.
2. Enterprise Payroll Privacy. Organizations need to distribute salaries and
departmental budgets to employee accounts without revealing sensitive details
on-chain [28,15,4].
arXiv:2604.22602v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

2
J. Yu et al.
3. Consumer-grade Central Limit Order Books. On-chain order books face
high gas costs and latency that prevent real-time trading at scale [32,24], and
many consumers prefer not to manage their own keys [9,41].
All three use cases demand support for internal transfers that are fast, low-
cost (ideally free), and private, with most value movement occurring internally
and on-chain transactions serving only for settlement. Purely on-chain or cus-
todial solutions cannot meet these requirements: on-chain transfers are slow,
expensive, and public, while custodial models introduce trust assumptions and
compromise privacy through full custodian visibility. The core challenge involves
private shared state—asset balances, transfer histories, and user subaccounts
that must remain confidential while being collectively maintained. This requires
TEEs for confidential computation with auditability, as well as designing appro-
priate access control models for this new computational paradigm.
In response to these needs, organizations and wallet providers have attempted
to retrofit traditional access control paradigms—such as Role-Based Access Con-
trol (RBAC) and Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC)—to govern internal
transfers and shared wallet usage [19,14]. This typically involves layering cus-
tom policy engines or custodial wrappers atop the standard single-owner wallet,
specifying who may initiate or approve transfers under various conditions [16,37].
However, traditional access-control frameworks such as RBAC and ABAC as-
sume an endogenous setting, as users create and manage their own files, objects,
or services, and policies are attached to these identities or roles. Blockchains
are fundamentally exogenous, where assets are created outside the wallet by
smart contracts and transferred permissionlessly in. In this setting, identity or
role-based rules are awkward to express and brittle to enforce. In a blockchain
context, what matters instead is provenance, describing who deposited an asset,
and how assets flow within a wallet.
In this paper, we propose PASS, a Provenanced Access Subaccount System
that enforces control directly by provenance. The core mechanism is simple: an
Inbox records external deposits, an Outbox signs and broadcasts withdrawals.
By leveraging a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE), all internal movements
remain private and fee-less. Every unit of value inside the wallet has a verifiable
lineage to an on-chain deposit, while externally a PASS wallet is indistinguishable
from a standard EOA. Our contributions include:
• A provenance-based access model aligned with blockchain’s exogenous asset
creation, enforced through an Inbox–Outbox design.
• A formal model in Lean 4 proving privacy, accessibility, and provenance in-
tegrity.
• A prototype with multi-vendor enclave backends (AWS Nitro, Intel TDX via
dstack [42]), a web app frontend integrated with WalletConnect, together with
throughput benchmarks.
• Application scenarios, including organizational custody, privacy-preserving
transfers, and safe delegation to AI agents.
PASS thus bridges the gap between strict self-custody and flexible shared
access, combining strong privacy guarantees with practical deployability.

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
3
2
Background and Related Work
Model
Control basis
On-chain
overhead
Internal
Privacy
Compatibility
EOA
Single private key
None
None
Native EOA
Multisig
t-of-n co-signers
High; quorum per
action
None; logic
public
Smart contract
based
ERC-4337
Smart
Accounts
On-chain policy
logic
Medium to high;
custom logic and
gas
None; logic
public
Requires
ERC-4337 chain
support
Custodians
Custom RBAC or
ABAC languages
None; Off-chain
enforcement
Custodian sees
all activity
API mediated
Liquefaction
TEE key
encumbrance;
policy trees
Medium; Oasis
contracts and gas
Strong; TEE
hides
subpolicies
Requires Oasis
deployment
PASS
(ours)
Provenance via
Inbox–Outbox
None; EOA
compatible
Strong;
internal
transfers
invisible
Native EOA
plus
off-the-shelf
TEEs
Table 1. Comparison of wallet architectures. PASS features provenance-based control,
off-chain privacy, and native EOA compatibility.
Growing retail and institutional adoption of digital assets [17] has driven di-
verse wallet designs [22]. We summarize mainstream Ethereum Virtual Machine
(EVM) wallet designs in Figure 1.
EOAs and Multisigs. Externally Owned Accounts (EOAs) give unilateral,
permanent control to whoever holds the private key [10]. Multisignature wallets
(e.g., Safe) distribute trust via t-of-n approvals [29], common for treasuries and
bridges [35,40,8]. Drawbacks include quorum overhead, symmetric authority, and
public logic with attackable frontends [8]. In contrast, PASS offers fine-grained,
scoped permissioning without new contracts.
Smart Contract Wallets and Account Abstraction. Wallets like Ar-
gent and Loopring add programmability (social recovery, spend limits) via on-
chain logic [2,21,26]. ERC-4337 enables custom validation through UserOperation
contracts [13], and EIP-7702 lets EOAs invoke this logic [31]. These increase flex-
ibility but expose policies publicly and incur gas costs, limiting use cases like
payroll. PASS instead enforces policy privately in a TEE, minimizing on-chain
footprint.
Custodial Policies. Custody providers (Fireblocks, Turnkey, Privy) use
RBAC/ABAC engines with custom policy languages [16,37]. PASS replaces these
with provenance: authority follows asset origin and history, akin to a UTXO
model. This reduces policy-surface complexity while remaining composable with
constraints like whitelists and blacklists.
TEEs and Liquefaction. Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) pro-
vide hardware-isolated contexts with remote attestation [23,30]. Liquefaction [7]
keeps wallet keys in a TEE and enforces sub-policies via key encumbrance, en-
suring privacy. PASS advances this model by (i) proving invariants in Lean 4, (ii)

4
J. Yu et al.
simplifying enforcement to a provenance rule with Inbox–Outbox subaccounts,
and (iii) working with a standard EOA without relying on Oasis smart contracts
[25]. We further validate by implementing PASS on AWS Nitro Enclaves and In-
tel TDX (via dstack), and showcase applications including AI wallets, payroll,
supply chains, and DAO voting.
Other Models. Exchanges pool funds in omnibus addresses with off-chain
ledgers [38]; mixers like Tornado Cash hide deposit–withdrawal links [28]. PASS
similarly hides internal transfers while retaining a provenance log for auditability;
outsiders see only deposits and withdrawals.
3
System Model and Design
Fig. 1. Overview of PASS. External deposits enter the Inbox and are claimed by sub-
accounts. Internal transfers are private and off-chain. Egress occurs via the Outbox,
which signs and broadcasts on-chain transactions. All on-chain activity has clear prove-
nance; internal movements remain private.
3.1
High-level system model
PASS is a multi-user wallet on a single EOA (sk, pk). The wallet maintains a
finite set of subaccounts U = {u1, . . . , un} and a set of assets A (e.g., ERC-20).
A subaccount u ∈U has authority over an amount x of asset α ∈A iff it can
obtain a signature from the global sk via the enclave; sk resides only inside a TEE
and is never directly accessible. We give the intuitive model here and formalize
it in Section 3.2.
Internally, PASS tracks balances with a map L : U × A →Z≥0 (accessed
via L[u][α]), an Inbox multiset I of unclaimed deposits (α, x, m), an Outbox
FIFO queue O of pending on-chain actions (α, x, extDst, ν) together with a global
nonce ν ∈N, and an append-only provenance log H. The core principles of PASS,
as shown in Figure 1 are as follows:

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
5
1. Access follows provenance. A unit of value is usable by u only if there exists a
custody chain in H from an external deposit to u. Informally, Allow(u, α, x)
means balance x is reachable for u via provenance in H. This implies consis-
tency: for every α, the total internal balance equals the on-chain balance at pk,
i.e., P
u∈U L[u][α] = Bon(α). Incoming deposits (α, x, m) ∈I are “wrapped”
and must be explicitly claimed before use by the sender address.
2. Off-chain privacy. Internal transfers u→v update only L and H; they do not
touch O or the on-chain balance Bon, so internal flow is invisible and fee-less.
3. First-come, first-served. Outbox transactions are sequenced by a FIFO queue,
which maintains and increments a global nonce ν and directly sends enclave-
signed transactions to a RPC node to prevent nonce conflicts and replay at-
tacks.6
Organizational Ownership Model. PASS operates under an organiza-
tional ownership model, where an entity such as a company, individual, or DAO
manages shared control over blockchain assets. We detail the threat model in
Section 4.
Inbox–Outbox Gateway External senders transfer assets to pk, creating
Inbox entries (α, x, m) ∈I. A user performs claim(u, α, x, m) to move value
into L[u][α], conceptually “wrapping” the deposit. To withdraw or interact with
a contract, a subaccount first performs an internal transfer to the Outbox,
which enqueues (α, x, extDst, ν); the enclave then signs the concrete transaction
with sk and immediately broadcasts it, incrementing ν. The FIFO discipline and
global nonce serialize actions and prevent races and double-spends. Because sub-
accounts never receive pre-signed transactions, pre-signing misuse is mitigated.
Composable policy scheme. Deposits are claims from I; internal transfers
require Allow(u, α, x) and update (L, H); withdrawals are internal transfers to
O followed by submission. Additional constraints (e.g., RBAC or ABAC checks,
whitelists and blacklists) can be incorporated as conjuncts to Allow without
changing the provenance-centric rule or its consistency and privacy effects.
3.2
Formal Model
We formalize PASS as a transition system in Lean 47, an interactive theorem
prover with a rich dependent type system [20], suitable for policy verification
(e.g., AWS Cedar [12]). In this section, we introduce the formal system we mod-
eled in Lean, and in Section 4 we will discuss security invariants modeled. An ex-
tended discussion of our formal verification system can be found in Appendix A.
State. A wallet state is S =
 pk, sk, ν, I, O, L, H

where (pk, sk, ν) are the
EOA public key, private key (generated and held in the TEE), and global nonce;
I and O are Inbox and Outbox; L is the internal balance map L[u][α] ∈Z≥0;
and H is the provenance history. For privacy arguments we also use the external
view Wpub = (pk, O, A), where O contains the Outbox queue and nonce and A
records total on-chain balances by asset.
6 We assume that the TEE is able to run a Helios light client, as is the case in dstack
Intel TDX, discussed and implemented in Section 5.2.
7 Lean 4 model: https://github.com/jayyu23/pass-lean4-proofs

6
J. Yu et al.
Transitions. Operations op ∈T update S with type-checked rules: InboxDe-
posit adds an unclaimed (α, x, m) to I; ClaimInbox moves (α, x, m) from I to
L[u][α] and appends to H; InternalTransfer moves value between subaccounts;
Withdraw debits L[u][α], enqueues (α, x, extDst, ν) in O, and logs; SignGSM
authorizes domain-scoped signable messages. A representative rule is:
 pk, sk, ν, I, O, L, H
 transfer(α,x,us,ur)
−−−−−−−−−−−→
 pk, sk, ν, I, O, L′, H′
with
if L[us][α] < x or ¬checkAllow(us, α, x, H) then ⊥;
L′[us][α] = L[us][α] −x,
L′[ur][α] = L[ur][α] + x;
H′ = H
  op = transfer, α, x, us, ur

.
Here checkAllow queries provenance in H and can be extended with auxiliary
constraints such as user whitelists or blacklists, without changing the core rule.
Figure 2 provides a formal specification of the methods in a PASS wallet.
Provenance Attestation. The TEE can generate cryptographic attesta-
tions over the integrity of H by signing its digest: σ = Signsk(Hash(H)). This
enables external verification of custody chains for compliance auditing and regu-
latory requirements without revealing internal transfer details. Attestations can
also cover other system components like the global nonce ν for freshness proofs
or balance states for solvency verification, following EIP-712 structured data
standards for interoperability.
3.3
Asset Model and General Signable Messages
PASS provides an authorization scheme over a heterogeneous set of assets A, in-
cluding fungible tokens, such as ether and ERC-20 tokens, ERC-721 non-fungible
tokens, and “general signable messages” across a variety of DApps for sign-in
and identity verification. Each asset α ∈A has a well-defined custody path in
the provenance log H, and a subaccount u ∈U has usable balance x of α iff
Allow(u, α, x) holds.
Token assets. For token assets such as ether, ERC-20, and ERC-721, de-
posits are captured as Inbox entries (α, x, m) ∈I. Claims allocate balance into
L[u][α], internal transfers update L and H privately, and withdrawals enqueue
(α, x, extDst, ν) into O for enclave signing and on-chain broadcast, ensuring con-
sistency where:
∀α ∈Atokens :
X
u∈U
L[u][α] = Bon(α, pk).
In particular, ERC-721 tokens are modeled with unique identifiers, where
each token ID is treated as a distinct asset αtokenId with unitary balance (x ∈
{0, 1}), ensuring uniqueness and preventing double-ownership under provenance.
General Signable Messages (GSMs). In addition to on-chain assets,
wallets often sign arbitrary messages, such as for EIP-4361 [33] logins and off-
chain DAO votes [34]. PASS models these as a special class AGSM of virtual

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
7
PASS Wallet Management Functionality FΣ
PASS for wallet W
Global State:
pk: public address (EOA)
sk: private key (in TEE)
ν: global nonce for on-chain transactions
I (Inbox): set of unclaimed deposits (α : asset, x : amount, m : depositId)
O (Outbox): FIFO queue (α, x, extDst, ν)
L (Asset Ledger): internal map L[u][α] ∈Z≥0, where u is each user’s ID in the system
H (Provenance History): a list of transaction records appended whenever ClaimInbox, In-
ternalTransfer, or Withdraw is invoked
CreatePassWallet (creator):
I ←∅, O ←∅, L←{}; ν ←0
(pk, sk)←TEE KeyGen()
Return new W with S =
 pk, sk, ν, I, O, L, H

and reference to creator
InboxDeposit (α, x, m) from external P :
I ←I ∪{(α, x, m)}
Return success
ClaimInbox (α, x, depositId) from u:
If no (α, x, m) with depositId in I, return ⊥
Remove (α, x, m) from I
L[u][α] ←L[u][α] + x
H ←H | (op = claim, α, x, depositId, u)
Return success
CheckAllow (usend, α, x, H):
If H.GetProvenance(α, usend) ≥x,
return true; else return false
InternalTransfer (α, x, usend, urecv):
If L[usend][α] < x or ¬checkAllow(usend, α, x, H), return ⊥
L[usend][α] ←L[usend][α] −x
L[urecv][α] ←L[urecv][α] + x
H ←H
  op = transfer, α, x, usend, urecv

Return success
Withdraw (α, x, usend, extDst):
If L[usend][α] < x or ¬checkAllow(usend, α, x, H), return ⊥
L[usend][α] ←L[usend][α] −x
O ←O ∪{(α, x, extDst, ν)}
H ←H | (op = withdraw, α, x, usend, extDst)
Return success
SignGSM (dom, msg, u):
If u lacks sign-right for (dom, msg), return ⊥
σ ←Sign(sk, msg)
Return σ
(Outbox Processing) (periodic or on demand):
If O ̸= ∅, dequeue (α, x, extDst, ν)
Build tx τ: transfer x of α to extDst, nonce = ν
σ ←Sign(sk, τ); broadcast (τ, σ)
ν ←ν + 1
Return broadcasted + txHash
Fig. 2. Formal Model of PASS wallet functionality, including CreatePassWallet for
initializing a fresh instance. On creation, pk is set to a chosen EOA address eoa, the
TEE generates a hidden private key sk, and global data structures are initialized.
External deposits enter I (Inbox), while subaccount transfers update L (Ledger) off-
chain. Withdrawals queue items in O (Outbox), and GSM operations are signed using
sk.
assets. Each GSM asset is scoped to a domain dom, so holding α = (dom)
represents authority to sign messages from that domain. A signature operation:
SignGSM(u, dom, m) 7→σ is permitted iff Allow(u, dom, 1) holds in H. At key
generation, the wallet creator is endowed with default signing authority over
all domains, represented as an initial allocation of every α = (dom) ∈AGSM
to the root subaccount. These domain assets can be internally transferred to

8
J. Yu et al.
delegate signing authority. Thus provenance of GSMs begins at the owner and
flows through transfers, providing a well-defined provenance path in H as with
token assets.
By treating both tokens and GSMs as types of elements of A, PASS provides
a unified provenance rule for subaccount authorization. A subaccount cannot
spend an ERC-20 token, transfer an NFT, or sign a domain message unless
it possesses the corresponding asset under L and H. This unified authorization
scheme allows for fine-grained delegation, (e.g., giving u rights over example.com
while withholding ERC–20 funds) and consistent enforcement across on-chain
and off-chain actions.
4
Properties of PASS
4.1
Threat Model
PASS operates under an organizational ownership model where a single entity
(company, DAO, or individual) manages the EOA (pk, sk) and TEE infrastruc-
ture. This model is typical for use cases described in Section 1. Protected assets
include the private key sk, balance ledger L, provenance log H, and access control
policy Allow(u, α, x). In our model, we make the following trust assumptions:
• TEE integrity. Hardware isolation is sound; sk never leaves the enclave.
Remote attestation guarantees that the enclave runs the genuine PASS binary.
• Cryptography. Standard primitives (signatures, hash functions, PRFs) are
secure against polynomial-time adversaries.
• Governance majority. The deploying entity holds majority control in the
governance mechanism (via DAO vote or admin privileges), ensuring it can
invoke the blockchain-governed KMS for MPC-based key recovery and trigger
fallback contracts when needed.
Adversary Model. An adversary A may control the host OS and network,
observe or modify all communication between enclaves, and submit arbitrary
transaction requests. In particular, A may attempt to:
• Exploit software bugs in the PASS implementation or TEE runtime,
• Forge or replay transactions to break consistency of H,
• Subvert provenance by violating Allow(u, α, x)
Threats Out of Scope. Physical TEE compromise, supply-chain attacks,
and malicious operators with unrestricted access (excluded due to organizational
security controls) are regarded out of scope because the organizational model
assumes controlled facilities and vetted hardware.
Security Goals. Given the assumptions above, PASS guarantees:
• Integrity: P
u∈U L[u][α] ≤extDep(α) for all α, i.e., no assets can be created
or double-spent internally.
• Correctness: If Allow(u, α, x) holds, then u can eventually realize x via With-
draw.
• Privacy on-chain: internal transfer operations do not affect externalTrace(W),
and to external observers, a PASS wallet is indistinguishable from an EOA.

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
9
• Liveness: For any authorized op ∈Ops, if one enclave and quorum remain
honest, then ∃τ s.t. Exec(c, op) = ⊤within τ.
4.2
Privacy and Safety
After establishing the threat model of PASS, we will address the central privacy
and safety guarantees in our formal verification model. We sketch three central
lemmas here, and create mechanized proofs in Lean, discussed in Appendix A.
Proposition 1 (Internal Transfer Privacy). If two public states W1, W2
share the same pk, identical Outbox (T, ν), and equal per-asset totals in A, then
externalTrace(W1) = externalTrace(W2).
Proof Sketch. InternalTransfer updates only (L, H), never O or total on-chain
balances. OutboxProcessing in Figure 2 emits on-chain actions solely from O
(lines 2–4), hence the trace depends only on O.
Corollary: EOA indistinguishability. If Wpass and Weoa share the same pk,
Outbox, and per-asset totals, then
externalTrace(Wpass) = externalTrace(Weoa).
Thus, from an external observer’s perspective, a PASS account is indistinguish-
able from a standard EOA: internal transfers leave no observable footprint.
Proposition 2 (Asset Accessibility). For any asset α, letting L = {u |
L[u][α] > 0},
X
u∈L
L[u][α] = totalBalance(α),
and each u ∈L can spend its full balance L[u][α] if and only if the following
predicate holds:
checkAllow(u, α, L[u][α], H).
Proof Sketch. ClaimInbox credits L; InternalTransfer preserves the sum over u;
Withdraw debits L and enqueues to O, which OutboxProcessing realizes on-chain.
checkAllow enforces reachability from provenance in H.
Proposition 3 (Provenance Integrity). Let extDep(α) be net external de-
posits (deposits minus realized withdrawals). For all reachable states,
X
u∈U
L[u][α] = extDep(α).
Proof Sketch. Induct on transitions. InboxDeposit increases extDep only, and
ClaimInbox moves already-deposited value into L. InternalTransfer conserves the
sum over u. Withdraw decreases the sum, and after OutboxProcessing broadcasts,
extDep is reduced accordingly.

10
J. Yu et al.
General signable messages (GSM). Model GSM rights as a domain-
scoped virtual asset class AGSM. Let α = (dom) ∈AGSM and permit
SignGSM(u, dom, m) iff Allow(u, α, 1).
Then (P2)–(P3) lift to GSM: there is always at least one domain signer, and
GSM “balances” obey provenance conservation under transfers in H.
4.3
Liveness
We define liveness as the property that any authorized operation remains even-
tually executable, despite enclave crashes, vendor compromise, or partial gover-
nance failure. Our model assumes deployment of PASS access logic on dstack,
implemented in Section 5 and detailed in Appendix B.
Let E denote active enclaves, C containerized wallet backends, and P gover-
nance policies. Each container c ∈C stores sealed state
σc = ⟨S, kc, meta⟩
with
S = (pk, sk, ν, I, O, L, H),
where kc = Derive(K, c) is derived from an MPC-managed Key Management
Service (KMS) and meta records attestation. An operation op ∈Ops (deposit
claim, transfer, withdrawal) executes as: Exec(c, op) = ⊤iff Attested(c) ∧Γ(S),
where Attested(c) checks σc against registry R and Γ is the quorum predicate
over P. To ensure vendor-agnostic portability, state migration µ : E →E satisfies
∀ei, ej ∈E,
ej.decrypt(σc,ei, kc) = σc,ei,
Theorem 1 (Liveness Theorem). If (i) the MPC KMS tolerates fKMS faults
in a t-of-n threshold, (ii) governance quorums are fgov-resilient, and (iii) at least
one enclave is uncompromised, then every op ∈Ops executes within bounded time
τ:
∀op ∈Ops, ∃τ ≥0 : Exec(c, op) = ⊤.
Proof Sketch. Progress follows from three guarantees: (1) the MPC KMS
ensures kc is always recoverable under threshold availability; (2) Γ encodes quo-
rum rules that eventually relax after timeout ∆t, ensuring some subset S satisfies
Γ(S) = ⊤; (3) migration µ allows any enclave to re-host σc, preventing vendor
lock-in or enclave failure. Algorithm 1 formalizes recovery and execution under
these assumptions.
Algorithm 1 RecoverAndExecute(c, op)
1: Verify enclave e attestation Qe against R.
2: Derive kc ←Derive(K, c); decrypt σc.
3: if CompromiseDetected(e′) then
4:
Rotate kc and re-encrypt σc.
5: end if
6: Ensure Γ(S) = ⊤for S ⊆P(c).
7: Execute op; append to H.

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
11
Key Properties. (1) Portability: any attested enclave can recover σc, inde-
pendent of vendor, given that kc is managed by KMS; (2) Monotonic Recovery:
recovery steps form ρ : S →S with ρ(s) ⪰s; (3) Domain Continuity: certificates
remain bound to R(c) under migration µ(c), preventing hijack or replay.
Implementation details of container orchestration, attestation, and KMS pro-
tocols are given in Appendix B.
5
Practical Implementations
5.1
Prototype Implementations
To demonstrate feasibility, we have implemented a prototype of PASS that cap-
tures the core architectural components.8 The prototype consists of:
• Provenanced Access Model, the core PASS architecture outlined in Section 3
with the Inbox–Outbox structure, asset ledgers, and provenanced rule as a
Rust executable.
• Web Application Frontend, a Typescript interface that allows users to deposit
assets, initiate internal transfers, generate on-chain transactions, and sign ar-
bitrary messages on Ethereum Sepolia testnet via WalletConnect v2.
• Multi-vendor TEE deployment, we deploy the PASS enclave executable in
both AWS Nitro Enclaves and Intel TDX with the dstack framework.
We evaluate these two enclave deployments as complementary paths with
distinct tradeoffs. AWS Nitro Enclaves simplify deployment through AWS
integration and attestation, but concentrate trust in a single vendor and store
the provenance ledger externally, potentially weakening liveness and asset ac-
cessibility guarantees. Intel TDX with dstack provides a portable, open-
source runtime across diverse hardware with decentralized operators and MPC-
based key management, preserving full security properties by executing both
Inbox–Outbox logic and provenance ledger inside the enclave, though at the
cost of added governance complexity for operator authorization and policy en-
forcement.
Blockchain Connectivity. To ensure reliable interaction, PASS embeds
Helios [1], a consensus-verified light client within the TEE, enabled via dstack
deployment. Helios verifies blockchain data against consensus proofs rather than
trusting external RPC endpoints, removing reliance on centralized providers
while preserving real-time performance. This guarantees that PASS’s Outbox
operates only on verified state, even if external network providers are compro-
mised.
5.2
Performance Benchmarks
Methodology. To evaluate PASS, we benchmarked its performance using both
AWS Nitro Enclaves and Intel TDX as secure backend environments. We selected
8 Prototype and deployment instructions can be found here: https://github.com/j
ayyu23/pass-wallet-app

12
J. Yu et al.
a suite of representative wallet operations—wallet creation, balance queries,
claims, transfers, withdrawals, provenance queries, and a comprehensive end-
to-end workflow9. To further stress-test PASS, we conducted batch experiments
involving 10, 000 consecutive deposit and claim operations, as well as transfer-
then-withdraw scenarios utilizing multi-threaded processing. Each operation was
run 100 times over 10 trials per environment, measuring throughput in opera-
tions per second (ops/sec). Both environments ran on identical virtual machines
(4 cores, 2.5 GHz, 16 GB RAM) to ensure a fair comparison. Table 2 summarizes
our results, with full details available in Appendix C.
Table 2. Internal PASS operation throughput (ops/sec) across AWS Nitro Enclaves
and Intel TDX. All operations are in-memory state changes within the TEE with no
blockchain interaction. Each value represents the average of 100 operations repeated
10 times per environment.
Operation
AWS Nitro Intel TDX
Wallet Creation
6,531
14,970
Account Balance Queries
530,943
935,428
Inbox-to-Subaccount Claims
14,856
33,064
Internal Subaccount Transfers
32,953
71,292
Withdrawal Request Creation
18,291
39,702
Transaction History Queries
3,757
7,685
End-to-End Workflow
35,663
78,433
Batch Deposit & Claim
481
724
Multi-threaded Operations (5 threads)
32,189
55,124
Analysis. The observed performance differences primarily stem from their
distinct hardware architectures. AWS Nitro Enclaves employ a disaggregated
system design, where the host server and the TEE hardware are physically sep-
arated. Communication occurs via vsock, and the enclave itself runs on a dedi-
cated, lower-performance coprocessor. In contrast, Intel TDX leverages a special
instruction set to provide enclave functionality directly on the main processor,
avoiding the overhead of data transfer. As a result, Intel TDX is able to de-
liver significantly higher throughput for in-enclave operations compared to AWS
Nitro Enclaves.
These preliminary benchmarks show that both Nitro and TDX backends can
sustain high throughput for critical wallet operations, confirming that PASS is
practical for real-world deployment.
Comparison with Related Work. To contextualize our performance re-
sults, we compare PASS with other TEE-based blockchain systems and tra-
ditional custodial solutions. Most existing wallet solutions operate under en-
tirely different trust and security models that preclude meaningful performance
comparisons. Hardware wallets prioritize air-gapped security over throughput,
while custodial services sacrifice transparency for performance optimizations
that PASS cannot adopt without compromising its core security guarantees.
Additionally, no prior work combines TEE-based execution with comprehensive
9 Complete sequence: deposit →claim →transfer →withdraw →process outbox

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
13
provenance tracking and rule-based access controls, making PASS’s architecture
fundamentally distinct from existing approaches.
Liquefaction. The Liquefaction system [7] represents the closest architectural
parallel to PASS, yet demonstrates significantly higher latencies. Liquefaction ex-
hibits up to 1,036.9 seconds for finalized confirmation due to its dependence on
external blockchain oracles for operation authorization. This design choice fun-
damentally limits scalability and user experience. In contrast, PASS’s innovative
Inbox–Outbox architecture enables all internal operations to execute within the
TEE without blockchain dependencies, achieving sub-millisecond latencies while
maintaining equivalent security guarantees through cryptographic auditability.
Traditional Custodians. While custodial solutions do not publish detailed per-
formance benchmarks, they achieve high throughput by centralizing trust and
sacrificing transparency—precisely the problems PASS was designed to solve.
Our TEE-based approach introduces only 5-7% performance overhead compared
to native execution [18], yet delivers fundamentally superior security properties:
cryptographic auditability, decentralized operation, elimination of single points
of failure, and user-controlled access policies. PASS thus achieves the perfor-
mance characteristics of centralized systems while providing the security guar-
antees traditionally associated only with self-custody solutions.
6
Applications
PASS is a powerful primitive for applications across three major blockchain
verticals: access control, custody & compliance, and scalability. Each vertical
captures a distinct research area, while provenance-based subaccounts provide a
unifying abstraction.
Access Control. PASS’s multi-user subaccount model enables flexible per-
mission scopes and safe delegation. As AI agents begin managing crypto assets,
there is a clear need to constrain their authority. With PASS, an agent can be
granted a subaccount holding only limited funds or specific signing rights, allow-
ing it to operate autonomously without risking the entire wallet; if compromised,
damage is capped to that subaccount. Similarly, DAO voting can be delegated
by granting signature rights restricted to governance DApps, without granting
spending authority. Organizations can also provision identity subaccounts that
map to individuals or teams under a shared ENS or corporate identity, each with
scoped balances and signing authority tracked through provenance.
Custody & Compliance. Internal privacy, built-in permissioning, and au-
ditable provenance make PASS well-suited to enterprise and regulatory con-
texts. A flagship application is private payroll: on-chain salary payments today
risk leaking sensitive information such as compensation levels or departmental
budgets. With PASS, salaries are distributed privately as internal subaccount
transfers, leaving a verifiable provenance trail for audits, but without exposing
per-employee details on-chain. Only periodic batched payouts exit via the Out-
box, balancing privacy with regulatory accountability. Beyond payroll, compliant
organizational wallets can allocate explicit departmental budgets while enabling

14
J. Yu et al.
Vertical
Application
Context
PASS Enables
Access
Control
AI Agent
Wallets
Autonomous agents
interacting with
crypto assets [39]
require bounded
signing authority.
Scoped subaccounts grant limited
balances and domain-specific
rights, enabling safe delegation
without exposing the root key.
DAO Voting
Delegation
DAOs depend on
address-based voting
and proxy
delegation [11].
Fine-grained voting rights
delegation auditable via
provenance; delegation can be
restricted to specific DApps or
domains.
Identity
Subaccounts
Organizations map
ENS or organizational
identities to
individuals or teams.
Each subaccount holds scoped
balances and signing rights, with
provenance tracking under a
shared organizational identity.
Custody &
Compliance
Private
Payroll
On-chain payrolls
reveal sensitive salary
information [4].
Salary distribution through
internal gasless transfers with
auditable logs; external payouts
are batched via the Outbox.
Compliant Org
Wallets
Firms must maintain
accountability and
BSA/AML
recordkeeping [15].
Departmental and individual
subaccounts with explicit budgets;
provenance ensures
regulator-grade auditability and
enables external proof exploration
without disclosing private flows.
Private B2B
Netting
Supply-chain and
recurring multi-party
payments require
confidentiality.
Vendor subaccounts allow internal
netting of obligations, with PASS
acting as a clearing house. Only
net settlements exit via the
Outbox, minimizing leakage while
retaining auditability.
Scalability
Gasless
Appchains
High-throughput
applications (e.g.,
trading engines) face
prohibitive gas costs
on-chain.
Internalize application logic as
subaccount transitions; Outbox
emits verifiable batch settlements,
ensuring correctness with minimal
gas.
Cross-chain
Bridges
Bridges require strong
custody and
coordination of
operators [40].
Inbox–Outbox abstractions enforce
provenance across domains; FIFO
nonce handling prevents replay or
race conditions.
L2
Composability
Rollups and L2s
fragment assets and
user experience [36].
Treat each L2 as a scoped
subaccount; maintain private
balance transfers internally, and
settle externally only when
crossing domains.
Table 3. Applications of PASS across three blockchain verticals: access control, custody
& compliance, and scalability. Each vertical highlights flagship use cases enabled by
provenance-based subaccounts.
regulator-grade proofs derived from the provenance log, and B2B netting allows
vendors to settle obligations internally, with only net amounts leaving the wallet
to reduce leakage while maintaining auditability.
Scalability. Finally, PASS supports blockchain scalability use cases where
per-transaction gas costs or cross-domain coordination overhead are prohibitive.
A flagship example is gasless appchains: high-throughput applications such as
central limit order books (CLOBs) can internalize matching and settlement as
subaccount transitions, with the Outbox emitting only periodic, verifiable batch

PASS: A Provenanced Access Subaccount System for Blockchain Wallets
15
settlements. Similarly, cross-chain bridges can leverage the Inbox–Outbox ab-
straction to enforce provenance across domains and ensure FIFO nonce discipline
to prevent replay, while L2 composability is achieved by treating each rollup or
sidechain as a scoped subaccount, allowing private balance transfers internally
and settling externally only on domain exits.
7
Discussion and Future Work
As PASS matures beyond a single-wallet instantiation, several directions emerge
for strengthening its composability, verifiability, and practical performance. Ap-
pendix D provides a high-level construction of extension designs for PASS.
Composability and InterPASS Transactions. Beyond single-wallet pri-
vacy and provenance, a key challenge is enabling secure interaction across wal-
lets in supply-chain or inter-organizational settings. The trivial method of direct
EOA transfers compromises privacy, so we envision each PASS instance as a
PCN (Payment Channel Network) hub, similar to XTransfer [6], with a central
Hub aggregating signed payment intents T := (ai, xi, si, ri)n
i=1, computing a
netted settlement S, and updating balances via a multi-party protocol akin to
Thora [5]. Optimistically this remains off-chain and private, while disputes in-
voke atomic on-chain enforcement. This design leverages provenance guarantees
for confidential, auditable inter-wallet transfers; full specification is left to future
work.
Instantiation on zkVM. The current PASS design primarily relies on
trusted execution environments (TEEs) to safeguard keys and enforce Inbox
and Outbox provenance rules, but this trust model depends on vendor attesta-
tion and hardware security, which may be insufficient in adversarial or regulatory
contexts that demand independent verification. zkVMs provide a natural next
step by enabling provenance-based control to be verified through succinct cryp-
tographic proofs rather than trusted hardware. By batching transitions over L,
H, I, and O and producing a proof π, a minimalist verifier contract can update
commitments and enforce outbox execution while preserving privacy. This direc-
tion complements the Chainless stack architecture [32], suggesting a path toward
modular, interoperable deployments of PASS with stronger external verifiability
and broader applicability.
Expansion of Formal Model and Further Benchmarks. We aim to
extend our Lean 4 formalization from wallet logic to enclave assumptions, quo-
rum dynamics, MPC-based recovery, and cross-vendor migration. Empirically,
while alternatives (multisigs, ERC-4337, custodial systems) lack benchmarks,
PASS already demonstrates throughput; we will expand evaluation to latency,
concurrency, and vendor diversity. Together these efforts provide application-
driven validation and stronger evidence for PASS as both formally sound and
practically deployable.

16
J. Yu et al.
8
Conclusion
We presented PASS, a Provenanced Access Subaccount System, as a new wallet
architecture that enforces access by provenance rather than by identity or role.
The Inbox–Outbox mechanism ensures all assets have a verifiable lineage, while
internal transfers remain private and indistinguishable from a standard EOA
account.
Our contributions are threefold: (i) a formal model in Lean 4 proving pri-
vacy, accessibility, and provenance integrity; (ii) a working prototype with en-
clave backends on AWS Nitro Enclaves and Intel TDX via dstack, integrated
with WalletConnect; and (iii) initial benchmarks showing the feasibility of high-
throughput operation. These results demonstrate that provenance-based control
can be realized today with mainstream blockchain tools.
Looking forward, richer evaluations across multi-vendor TEEs, integration
with zkVMs, and exploration of organizational and agent-based custody are
promising directions. By combining rigorous formal guarantees with deployable
prototypes, PASS advances the design space between strict self-custody and
flexible shared access, offering a path toward practical, privacy-preserving wallet
security.