Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation
Attacks
Max Hartman * 1 Vidhata Jayaraman * 1 Moulik Choraria 1 Lav R. Varshney 2
Abstract
Frontier models push the boundaries of what is
learnable at extreme computational costs, yet dis-
tillation via sampling reasoning traces exposes
closed-source frontier models to adversarial third
parties who can bypass their guardrails and mis-
appropriate their capabilities, raising safety, secu-
rity, and intellectual privacy concerns. To address
this, there is growing interest in building antidis-
tillation methods, which aim to poison reasoning
traces to hinder downstream student model learn-
ing while maintaining teacher performance. How-
ever, current techniques lack theoretical ground-
ing, requiring either heavy fine-tuning or access to
student model proxies for gradient based attacks,
and often lead to a significant teacher performance
degradation. In this work, we present a theoret-
ical formulation of antidistillation as a Stackel-
berg game, grounding a problem that has so far
largely been approached heuristically. Guided
by the desired design properties our formulation
reveals, we propose TraceGuard, an efficient,
post-generation black-box method to poison sen-
tences with high importance for teacher reasoning.
Our work offers a scalable solution to share model
insights safely, ensuring that the advancement of
reasoning capabilities does not come at the cost
of intellectual privacy or AI safety alignment.
1. Introduction
Reasoning in large language models (LLMs) has led to sig-
nificant performance improvements on difficult multi-step
reasoning tasks such as mathematics, software debugging,
and general strategic planning (OpenAI, 2024; Qwen, 2024;
Anthropic, 2026b). In addition to these performance gains,
reasoning traces provide practical insights into how answers
1Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States 2Stony Brook
University, New York, United States. Correspondence to: Max
Hartman <maxh3@illinois.edu>.
Preprint. April 28, 2026.
are generated, improving the trustworthiness of models for
users. However, providing full reasoning traces poses a se-
curity challenge: while knowledge distillation via reasoning
traces was proposed to improve training efficiency (Hsieh
et al., 2023; Mukherjee et al., 2023), distilled models have
since been shown to match and even surpass their teachers
at a fraction of the cost (Guo et al., 2025), raising significant
intellectual privacy concerns for frontier labs competing at
the edge of learnability (Anthropic, 2026a). These concerns
are now reaching the forefront of United States national
policy, with recent legislative proposals explicitly targeting
the extraction of capabilities from closed-source AI models
(119th Congress, 2026; Kratsios, 2026) that essentially cir-
cumvent export controls on compute. Furthermore, from a
safety perspective, recent work has shown that distilled mod-
els often lose the safety alignment trained into the teacher
model (Jahan & Sun, 2025; Shi et al., 2026). This creates a
direct pathway from publicly exposed reasoning traces to
unmoderated, potentially dangerous models.
Methods have been proposed to mitigate this risk (Savani
et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025; Ma et al., 2026).
While these defensive techniques represent a significant
step forward, they are currently bottlenecked by three pri-
mary constraints: computational overhead from retraining
either the teacher or training an additional model used in
the system; a noticeable degradation in the teacher model’s
final output performance; and unacceptable level of inco-
herence in the sampled reasoning trace. In addition to the
practical limitations, the theoretical foundations of distilla-
tion defense methods remain significantly underexplored
as current approaches largely lack any formal guarantees
necessary for reliable deployment.
In this work, we cast antidistillation in a game-theoretic
framework, taking a step toward closing this gap. We then
show that existing methods such as Antidistillation Sam-
pling and Defensive Output Generation arise as special cases
of this formulation, while drawing attention on an important
yet overlooked aspect of the problem: detectability. Factor-
ing in the need to maintain teacher performance and trace
coherence, we then ask a natural next question: under these
constraints, where and how should a defender intervene?
We draw on recent work in LLM interpretability, which has
shown that specific tokens in reasoning traces are dispropor-
1
arXiv:2604.23238v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
tionately important to the model output and reasoning flow.
For example, certain sentences have been shown to have a
significant importance in the way reasoning trajectories are
generated, known as thought anchors (Bogdan et al., 2025).
Additionally, high entropy tokens have been shown to have
similar properties (Wang et al., 2025). Guided by these find-
ings, we propose TraceGuard, a training-free, black-box
method that poisons sentences anchored at key branching
tokens, degrading student post-distillation accuracy while
preserving teacher performance and trace coherence.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
1. We provide an improved formulation of the antidistilla-
tion task as a bi-level optimization problem, with the
goal of motivating future cryptography and security
work from a theoretical perspective. We provide in-
tuition via a security-motivated poisoning method to
justify why poisoning fewer tokens makes a poisoning
method less detectable.
2. We argue that poisoning branching tokens is an effec-
tive way to cause student degradation with a small
token poisoning budget. We propose a method to effi-
ciently poison these tokens, while maintaining gram-
matical coherence in the poisoned trace. This is demon-
strated through experiments comparing the degradation
versus tokens poisoned.
2. Related Work
2.1. Antidistilation
Antidistillation techniques aim to prevent adversarial model
distillation attacks by modifying a teacher’s outputs to be
poor training data for the student. Savani et al. (2025) pro-
posed antidistillation sampling (ADS), which perturbs the
next-token probability distribution of the teacher model by
encouraging the generation of tokens to degrade a student
model, via a proxy model. Ma et al. (2026) proposed a
prompting approach, which instructs the LLM to generate
less distillation-friendly reasoning traces, and a gradient-
based approach, which perturbs tokens post-generation to
maximize test loss on a proxy model. The Defensive Output
Generation (DOGe) method (Li et al., 2025) finetunes the
teacher model’s final layer with a loss to prevent student
learning. Ding et al. (2025) finetunes an LLM to remove
self-talk tokens from the reasoning trace. We build upon
these works by developing a game-theoretic formulation of
the problem and proposing a method that addresses the gaps
we observe in these works.
2.2. Reasoning in LLMs
Chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning, in which models are
trained to generate intermediate reasoning steps, emerged in
recent years as a technique to improve the performance of
models on complex multi-step tasks (Wei et al., 2022). The
Tree-of-thought (ToT) technique generalized and improved
CoT by enabling LLMs to consider different reasoning paths
(Yao et al., 2023). Reinforcement learning post-training with
human-annotated reasoning data was used as an approach to
distill reasoning capabilities models. Reinforcement learn-
ing without human-labeled data was then proposed (OpenAI,
2024; Qwen, 2024). Recently, models have been trained to
learn reasoning by distilling knowledge from a large reason-
ing model, such as the R1-distill series (Guo et al., 2025).
2.3. Data Poisoning
Data poisoning is an integrity attack on the training phase of
machine learning models. These types of attacks manipulate
the distribution of training data itself to harm the model
according to an objective determined by the attacker (Fan
et al., 2022). Early work on the topic started with these
attacks on support vector machines and neural networks
(Biggio et al., 2012; Shafahi et al., 2018). These attacks have
also been shown effective against LLMs (Carlini et al., 2024;
Souly et al., 2025). Our work shows that antidistillation can
be formulated in a very similar manner to data poisoning,
where the roles of the attack and defender are flipped.
3. A Game-Theoretic Formulation of
Antidistillation
3.1. Notation
D denotes the clean reference dataset; ˜D denotes a can-
didate poisoned dataset drawn from an admissible pertur-
bation set B around D; θT and θS denote the teacher and
student parameters with corresponding parameter spaces
ΘT and ΘS; and ˜L and L denote the training loss on ˜D and
evaluation loss on D, respectively.
3.2. Formulation
In prior literature, antidistillation techniques have primarily
focused on minimizing the utility of distilling from reason-
ing traces while preserving teacher performance. However,
any practical defense must also account for detectability:
if an attacker can identify that a defense is in place, they
can adapt their sampling strategy to evade it. In this section,
we formalize the antidistillation problem and show how our
general setting naturally handles both concerns.
We motivate our framework by first analyzing the related
problem of data poisoning, in which an adversary injects
corrupted examples into a training set such that any model
trained on it performs poorly at test time. The adversary is
constrained to perturbations that remain close to legitimate
data, so that the attack is not trivially detectable. This inter-
2

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
action can be viewed as a Stackelberg game, stated formally
in Appendix A.
We find that antidistillation fits this template closely: a
model provider releases outputs (the “dataset”) that a third
party uses to train a student model, and the provider would
like those outputs to be useful to legitimate users while
being maximally unhelpful as training data for the student.
The bi-level structure carries over directly.
That said, antidistillation differs from classical data poison-
ing in two important ways. First, the architecture of the
downstream model to be poisoned is not necessarily a pri-
ori known. Previous methods typically assume access to a
proxy model (Savani et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025), however
such an assumption may fail to hold. As such, instead of just
maximizing the harm caused to the optimal model trained
on the poisoned data, the goal of antidistillation is to max-
imize the minimum error across all potential architectures
by optimizing the poison in the training data. Second, as a
conceptual difference in this setting, the roles of the attacker
and defender are flipped from the classical data poisoning
formulation: the defender is poisoning the data whereas the
attacker is training the optimal model from the poisoned
data.
This gives rise to a slightly different Stackelberg game,
where the defender is concerned with maximizing the loss
over all allowed architectures rather than maximizing the
loss over a specific known architecture. This is because the
attacker has a priori chosen a specific architecture to fine-
tune; however, the defender does not know that choice of
architecture. Formally, the defender seeks a robust poisoned
dataset ˜D∗
T such that
˜D∗
T = arg
max
˜
DT ∈B(D;θT ,ΘT )
inf
H∈F Ex∼pdata
h
L(h∗
H( ˜DT ); x)
i
,
where B(D; θT , ΘT )1 is the set of admissible poisoned
datasets which can depend on the original dataset produced
by the teacher D, on the teacher’s parameters θT , and on
the architecture of the teacher ΘT . Additionally, F is the
set of admissible function classes (e.g. model architectures),
pdata is the true data distribution, and L is the population
loss function. Here, h∗
H( ˜DT ) is defined as
h∗
H( ˜DT ) := arg inf
h∈H
˜L(h; ˜DT ).
In contrast to this robust formulation for the defender, the
attacker’s objective is simply
h∗
Hs( ˜DT ) = arg inf
h∈Hs
˜L(h; ˜DT ),
where the attacker wants to minimize, for their specific
architecture Hs, the loss on the poisoned dataset.
1For convenience, this set will be denoted as B for the remain-
der of this paper.
This formulation provides the defender with a strict the-
oretical guarantee: as long as the attacker’s true architec-
ture satisfies Hs ∈F, the actual population loss accrued,
Ex∼pdata
h
L

h∗
Hs

˜D∗
T

; x
i
, is bounded from below by
the solution to the robust max-inf objective in (1).
The above game gives rise to the following robust opti-
mization formulation of antidistillation (from the defender’s
perspective):
˜DT = arg max
˜
DT ∈B
inf
H∈F Ex∼pdata
h
L

h∗
H

˜DT

; x
i
. (1)
Remark 3.1. Observe that (1) fundamentally differs from
formulating the problem as directly evaluating the empirical
risk minimizer over the entire function space:
˜DT = arg max
˜
DT ∈B
Ex∼pdata

L

arg inf
h∈F
˜L

h; ˜DT

; x

.
If F
is sufficiently expressive,
directly evaluating
arg infh∈F allows the model to perfectly memorize the
poisoned dataset ˜DT while performing arbitrarily poorly
on the true distribution pdata. This makes the defender’s
task trivial. By placing the infH∈F outside the population
loss, we impose a stricter, more realistic burden on the de-
fender: it must find a universal poison that maximizes the
generalization error against the most resilient admissible
architecture, rather than merely exploiting a hypothetical
overfit model.
Remark 3.2. In practice, most constraint sets B(D; θT , ΘT )
will take the form
Bϵ(D; θT ) :=
n
˜DT : d( ˜DT (˜θT ), D(θT )) ≤ϵ, ˜θT ∈ΘT
o
,
where θT ∈ΘT , d is some distortion measure between the
perturbed dataset ˜DT , which is perhaps a function of some
perturbed teacher model ˜θT , and D, which is a function of
θT . This distortion measure allows one to capture both the
difference in performance of the perturbed dataset (or per-
turbed teacher model) and the detectability of the proposed
antidistillation method.
3.3. Instantiations of the Antidistillation Game
Within this subsection, we go through consequences of two
specific instantiations of the antidistillation game with re-
spect to F.
3.3.1. STUDENT ARCHITECTURE IS KNOWN
We first consider the simplest case where F = {H}. In this
case the antidistillation problem (1) simplifies to
˜DT = arg max
˜
D∈B
Ex∼pdata

L

arg inf
h∈H
˜L

h; ˜DT

; x

.
(2)
3

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
The antidistillation problem in this case reduces to the data
poisoning problem, described in Appendix A. When the
student model architecture is a priori known, literature from
data poisoning can be used to adequately determine the
“best” poisoning policy.
3.3.2. DEFENDER HAS PRIOR OVER ARCHITECTURES
Often, defenders will have some prior PF, which describes
the likelihood different model architectures are for distil-
lation attacks. For example, a defender may assign a very
high probability to Transformer-based architectures, thus
encoding useful information to make their defense stronger.
Concretely, the space of allowable student architectures may
be finite, thus allowing the defender to construct the follow-
ing probability space (F, 2F, PF). We note that in practice,
one would have to imbue the space of all admissible student
architectures with a σ-algebra, which may be non-trivial.
Regardless, this permits the following relaxation of (1):
˜DT = arg max
˜
DT ∈B
EH∼PF
h
Ex∼pdata
h
L

h∗
H

˜DT

; x
ii
(3)
= arg max
˜
DT ∈B
E(H,x)∼PF⊗pdata
h
L

h∗
H

˜DT

; x
i
.
(4)
2 Also, observe that
max
˜
DT ∈B
inf
H∈F Ex∼pdata
h
L

h∗
H

˜DT

; x
i
≤max
˜
DT ∈B
E(H,x)∼PF⊗pdata
h
L

h∗
H

˜DT

; x
i
,
meaning that this is an upper-bound relaxation of the orig-
inal worst-case, max max-min objective. However, the
Bayesian setting may still be more practically useful as a
defender will often have some prior on the feasible student
architectures.
Remark 3.3. This Bayesian reframing transforms the origi-
nal purely adversarial game into a Bayesian Robust Stack-
elberg game, where the defender maximizes their expected
payoff against a known distribution of attacker types.
3.4. Generalization of Previous Antidistillation Methods
The main distinction between different antidistillation meth-
ods is how they instantiate the set of admissible perturba-
tions of the dataset D and in what they consider the set of
viable student architectures. In the remainder of this subsec-
tion, we show how both Antidistillation Sampling (Savani
et al., 2025) and Defensive Output Generation (Li et al.,
2025) fit into the framework of (1).
2Assuming L is non-negative and measurable, since PF and
pdata are independent this follows by Fubini’s theorem.
3.4.1. ANTIDISTILLATION SAMPLING
ADS proceeds in an online antidistillation fashion, where
individual teacher outputs are given per user query. Their
formulation is a greedy approach to the outer maximiza-
tion over ˜DT , where they try to maximize the loss of each
individual teacher output. ADS considers the following
perturbation to the teacher output distribution:
˜p(· | x1:t; θT ) := 1
Z exp
1
τ log p(· | x1:t; θT )
+ λ∆(· | x1:t; θP )

,
where Z is a normalization factor, τ is the sampling tem-
perature, p(· | x1:t; θT ) is the original teacher distribution
for token t + 1, λ is a scaling hyperparameter and ∆is a
perturbation to the output distribution determined by the
gradients of a proxy model.3
Thus, the set of admissible perturbations is the following,
BADS(D; θT ) = {˜xi : ˜xi ∼˜p(· | x1:t; θT )}n
i=1 .
(5)
3.4.2. DEFENSIVE OUTPUT GENERATION
DOGe proposes that the task of antidistillation can be
framed as the following bi-level optimization problem. The
defender controls the teacher’s parameters to maximize its
performance while weakening any student distilled from its
outputs. The optimization problem is thus:
θ∗
T = arg max
θT [Perf(θT ) −λ · Perf (θ∗
S)]
θ∗
S = arg min
θS L(θS; DKD(θT )),
where Perf(·) is the performance of the input model, DKD
is the outputs of the teacher model θ∗
T , and λ > 0 is a scaling
hyperparameter.
We connect this to our formulation in (1) by first defining
BDOGe(D; θT , ΘT )
(6)
=
n
˜DT : ˜DT ∼p(· | θT ), θT ∈ΘT , Perf(θT ) ≥τ
o
.
(7)
If we now consider the case where |F| = 1, (1) simplifies
to
˜DT = arg
max
˜
DT ∈BDOGe
Ex∼pdata
h
−Perf(θ∗
S( ˜DT ); x)
i
.
Since the dataset entirely depends on the parameters θT we
can determine ˜DT equivalently by finding
θ∗
T = arg
max
θT ∈ΘT ,Perf(θT )≥τ Ex∼pdata
h
−Perf(θ∗
S( ˜DT ); x)
i
,
3∆(· | x1:t; θP ) = ℓ(θ+
P ) −ℓ(θP )
= ℓ(θP + η∇θP log p(xt+1 | x1:t; θP )) −ℓ(θP )
4

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
and taking a Lagrangian relaxation of this problem yields
θ∗
T = arg max
θT ∈ΘT Perf(θT ) −λPerf(θ∗
S(θT ))
which is exactly the DOGe framework.
3.5. A Gaussian Case Study
The prior works, ADS and DOGe, perturb the teacher’s
output distribution (within some λ ball) at every token posi-
tion, analogous to ℓ2 attacks on images (Moosavi-Dezfooli
et al., 2016; Madry et al., 2019) in the adversarial robust-
ness literature. However, a well-established finding from
this area is that sparse, targeted perturbations can be equally
effective while being harder to detect. One-pixel attacks (Su
et al., 2017) and the Jacobian-based Saliency Map Approach
(JSMA) (Wiyatno & Xu, 2018) demonstrate that perturb-
ing a small number of carefully chosen input dimensions
suffices to fool classifiers, often with greater success than
uniform perturbation at equivalent total distortion budgets.
Motivated by this analogy, we ask: what are the theoretical
properties of an antidistillation method that modifies only
k ≪L tokens in a reasoning trace of length L? To study
this, we consider a simple Gaussian perturbation scheme
that admits closed-form detectability bounds.
Specifically, we consider the following constraint set B. Let
D = {x(i)}n
i=1 be the clean dataset generated by teacher
model θT where each output is a sequence of length Li
(i.e. x(i) = (x(i)
1 , . . . , x(i)
Li)). Let fθT (x<t) ∈R|V| denote
the pre-softmax logits of the teacher model at step t over a
vocabulary V. We define the constraint set Bη,k(D; θT ) as
the set of all ˜DT = {˜x(i)} such that the following conditions
hold for every sequence i ∈{1, . . . , N}:
1. There exists a mask of chosen token indices M (i) ⊂
{1, . . . , Li} such that |M (i)| ≤k
2. For all t /∈M (i), the original token is perfectly pre-
served (i.e. ˜x(i) = x(i)).
3. For all t ∈M (i), the perturbed token ˜x(i) is sampled
from the following perturbed distribution
˜x(i) ∼softmax(fθT (x(i)
<t)+ξt), where ξt ∼N(0, σ2I)
4. We have the following bound on the variance σ2
σ2 ≤2η
k
We can see that since the constraint set perturbs some set
of k tokens post-generation, the performance of the teacher
model can be perfectly maintained by not perturbing the
answer token(s). Broadly, the set of admissible architectures
could be some set of known LLM architectures. Because
we are restricting to autoregressive models, if token t is
poisoned in this way, then the student model will be at-
tempting to learn noise when it predicts token t from the
previous t −1 tokens. As such, this will likely degrade
student performance. Thus, the main concern will be the de-
tectability of this method. In Proposition 3.4 and Corollary
3.5 we provide results on the detectability of this method
as measured by the expected Kullback-Leibler divergence
between the perturbed distribution used and the original
teacher distribution.
Proposition 3.4. Let z ∈RV be a vector of logits defining
a teacher distribution PT = softmax(z). Let ϵ ∈RV be
a random noise vector satisfying E[∥ϵ∥2
2] = σ2, and define
the perturbed distribution PP = softmax(z + ϵ). Then
Eϵ[DKL(PP ∥PT )] ≤σ2
2 .
Proof. Rewriting the KL divergence between the two soft-
max distributions as the Bregman divergence generated by
the log-sum-exp function Φ, its integral form expresses the
KL as a path integral of ϵ⊤∇2Φ ϵ, which is a variance under
the intermediate softmax and hence bounded by ∥ϵ∥2
2. Eval-
uating
R 1
0 t dt = 1
2 and taking expectation with E∥ϵ∥2
2 = σ2
yields the bound σ2/2. See full proof in Appendix D.
This shows that the divergence of a single next-token dis-
tribution is bounded proportionally to the variance of the
perturbation noise. In the following corollary, we show that
the expected divergence for some k independent tokens is
bounded proportionally to the number of tokens and noise
added to each token.
Corollary 3.5. If ϵ(i) ∈RV is applied to k independent
tokens with E[∥ϵ(i)∥] ≤σ2, ∀i then
Eϵ[DKL(PP ∥PT )] ≤k σ2
2 .
Proof. Since the k noisy token distributions are condition-
ally independent given the unchanged context, the joint KL
divergence factorizes into a sum of k per-token KL diver-
gences. We can then apply the previous proposition to each
term bounds the total by kσ2/2 (proof in Appendix D).
The main takeaway is that for any dataset in Bη,k(D; θT )
such that the mask tokens are chosen independently, the
detectability is less than η. As the divergence between the
perturbed distribution grows linearly with k, this shows that
using a method which modifies fewer tokens will be less
detectable by an attacker. This will serve as the guiding
design principle for our method in the next section.
5

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
Figure 1. The figure shows a poisoned reasoning trace of a sample
prompt from MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) using the Gaussian
perturbation method described above and std=10. This poisoned
trace has many grammatical errors.
4. Method
4.1. A Naive Approach to Sparse Perturbations
While the Gaussian case study establishes that modifying
fewer tokens reduces detectability, directly implementing
Bη,k, that is, selecting k positions and adding Gaussian
noise to their logits faces three obstacles.
First, a noise intensity dilemma: large σ produces tokens
that break grammatical coherence with unperturbed neigh-
bors (Figure 1), while small σ is absorbed by the softmax
and fails to change the sampled token at all (Figure 2).
This tension is inherent to perturbing individual token logits
while leaving adjacent tokens fixed.
Second, combinatorial hardness: selecting which k of L
tokens to perturb requires evaluating
 L
k

candidate subsets,
each requiring a student training run to assess effective-
ness. Even greedy approximations require backpropagation
through a non-differentiable discrete sampling operation.
Third, local detectability: although aggregate KL remains
bounded by Corollary 3.5, a distiller can easily flag posi-
tions where the observed token does fit in the context of the
sentence, leading to obvious incoherence.
These limitations motivate a method that identifies struc-
turally important positions without combinatorial search
and perturbs them in a way that preserves local coherence.
4.2. Identifying Critical Reasoning Steps
Rather than searching over
 L
k

token subsets, we leverage
the finding that reasoning traces have highly non-uniform
importance. Specifically, Bogdan et al. (2025) showed that
Figure 2. The figure shows a poisoned reasoning trace of a sample
prompt from MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) using the Gaussian
perturbation method described above using std= 0.5. Many tokens
which were poisoned did not modify the token from baseline
because the poisoning to their logits was too small.
a small fraction of sentences, termed thought anchors, have
significant counterfactual importance on the final answer.
These are predominantly planning sentences (e.g., “Alter-
natively, maybe I can calculate this in decimal”) and un-
certainty management sentences (e.g., “Wait, I made a mis-
take”), while active computation sentences perform prede-
termined operations with minimal causal influence. Com-
plementary work also shows that ∼20% of tokens are high-
entropy “forks” that steer reasoning trajectories (Wang et al.,
2025), and that replacing individual critical tokens can even
flip model outputs (Lin et al., 2025).
While these ideas do provide a clear starting point, a nat-
ural concern is whether removing these anchors from the
teacher’s trace actually degrades student models trained via
distillation, given that the teacher’s own answer is unaf-
fected. To that end, recent work from Zhang et al. (2025)
shows that activation patching at key reasoning tokens in
distilled DeepSeek-R1 models reliably alters final answers,
confirming that functional dependence on reasoning steps
transfers through SFT. Since fine-tuning gradients are largest
at the teacher’s most informative tokens (precisely the plan-
ning tokens within thought anchors), removing these sen-
tences remove the highest-gradient training signals.
Note that by targeting thought anchors, we also resolve the
pitfalls listed in Section 4.1: there is no noise parameter
to tune (sentences are either removed or retained), no com-
binatorial search (targets are identified by their semantic
role), and no local incoherence (the removed sentences are
self-reflective steps whose absence still preserves the logical
flow of surrounding text). The method requires no proxy
model, making it compatible with the robust formulation
6

Protecting the Trace: A Principled Black-Box Approach Against Distillation Attacks
Figure 3. Example trace poisoning with the TraceGuard method.
Without explicitly searching for thought anchors, each sentence
that gets poisoned by the method is a thought anchor (Bogdan et al.,
2025). These sentences have been shown to disproportionately
affect answer quality.
in (1) where Hs is unknown.
4.3. TraceGuard
Algorithm 1 TraceGuard: Targeted Trace Poisoning
Require: Reasoning trace D = {s1, s2, . . . , sn}, branch-
ing tokens S = {“Wait”, “Hold on”, ...}, removal bud-
get k
Ensure: Poisoned reasoning trace ˜D
1: Initialize ˜D ←∅
2: Initialize removedCount ←0
3: for all si ∈D do
4:
firstToken ←GETFIRSTTOKEN(si)
5:
if firstToken ∈S and removedCount < k then
6:
removedCount ←removedCount + 1 {Remove
anchor}
7:
else
8:
Append si to ˜D {Keep sentence}
9:
end if
10: end for
11: Return ˜D
Having established the case for targeting thought anchors, a
practical challenge remains: the full receiver-head methodol-
ogy of Bogdan et al. (2025) requires a forward pass with at-
tention extraction per trace, which is computationally expen-
sive. However, we observe empirically that high-importance
sentences are strongly correlated with sentences beginning
with characteristic discourse markers such as “Wait”, “Hold
on”, and “Alternatively.” This lightweight keyword heuristic
identifies thought anchors with reasonable accuracy at zero
additional compute cost, and we adopt it as the basis for our
proposed method, TraceGuard, formalized in Algorithm 1.
The removal budget k, which denotes the maximum number
of branching sentences that can be removed for each trace, is
included so we can vary the poisoning intensity. We provide
an example of our method poisoning a reasoning trace in
Figure 3.
5. Experiments
In the following experiments, we evaluate the distillation
performance degradation using teacher traces both unaltered
and protected with TraceGuard. We then evaluate how
the accuracy changes when a student is distilled with these
datasets. When poisoning, we vary the removal budget by
searching for at most k = 10, 20, 50 reasoning sentences
to remove in each trace. We report the accuracy drop from
baseline to poisoned distillation versus the average num-
ber of tokens poisoned per trace. We use DeepSeek-R1-
Distill-Qwen-7B as the teacher model, and Llama-3.2-3B,
Llama-3.2-1B, and Gemma 3 1B as student models. Exact
distillation training parameters and setup are provided in