JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
MATRIX: Multi-Layer Code Watermarking via
Dual-Channel Constrained Parity-Check Encoding
Yuqing Nie, Chong Wang*, Guosheng Xu*, Guoai Xu, Chenyu Wang, Haoyu Wang, Kailong Wang
Abstract—Code Large Language Models (Code LLMs) have
revolutionized software development but raised critical concerns
regarding code provenance, copyright protection, and security.
Existing code watermarking approaches suffer from two funda-
mental limitations: black-box methods either exhibit detectable
syntactic patterns vulnerable to statistical analysis or rely on
implicit neural embedding behaviors that weaken interpretabil-
ity, auditability, and precise control, while white-box methods
lack code-aware capabilities that may compromise functionality.
Moreover, current single-layer watermarking schemes fail to
address increasingly complex provenance requirements such as
multi-level attribution and version tracking.
We present MATRIX, a novel code watermarking framework
that formulates watermark encoding as solving constrained
parity-check matrix equations. MATRIX employs dual-channel
watermarking through variable naming and semantic-preserving
transformations, enhancing watermark coverage across a wider
range of code while ensuring mutual backup for robustness. By
integrating BCH error-correction codes with solution space diver-
sity, our approach achieves robustness against statistical analysis.
Extensive evaluation on Python code generated by multiple Code
LLMs demonstrates that MATRIX achieves an average water-
mark detection accuracy of 99.20% with minimal functionality
loss (0–0.14%), improves robustness by 7.70–26.67% against var-
ious attacks, and increases watermarking applicability by 2–6×
compared with existing methods. These results establish MATRIX
as an effective solution for complex code provenance scenarios
while balancing among detectability, fidelity, and robustness.
Index
Terms—Code
watermarkiing,
LLM
watermarking,
Copyright.
I. INTRODUCTION
Code Large Language Models (Code LLMs) have emerged
as a specialized branch of LLMs, focusing on generating,
understanding, and manipulating programming code. Recent
advances have produced numerous powerful Code LLMs,
including CodeLlama [1], DeepSeek-Coder [2], which have
been extensively deployed in practical applications like code
completion, code generation, bug fixing, and code summariza-
tion [3]–[8].
While Code LLMs have revolutionized software develop-
ment by providing unprecedented assistance to programmers
Yuqing Nie, Guosheng Xu, Chenyu Wang is with the School of Cy-
berspace Security, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China (e-mail: jiangsha@bupt.edu.cn; guoshengxu@bupt.edu.cn;
wangchenyu@bupt.edu.cn)
Chong Wang is with Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (e-mail:
chong.wang@ntu.edu.sg)
Guoai Xu is with Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, and
with Comprehensive Research Center of Electronic Information Technology
in the MllT (e-mail: xga@hit.edu.cn)
Kailong Wang, Haoyu Wang is with the School of Cyberspace Security,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China (e-mail:
wangkl@hust.edu.cn; haoyuwang@hust.edu.cn)
*Corresponding author.
[9]–[12] and democratizing code creation for non-expert de-
velopers
[8], [13], their widespread adoption has simulta-
neously raised critical legal, ethical, and security concerns.
A prominent issue stems from the memorization capabilities
of Code LLMs, which can inadvertently reproduce copyright-
protected code snippets from their training datasets without
the original authors’ consent [14]–[17]. Furthermore, due to
inherent limitations in model capabilities or potential misuse
by users, Code LLMs may generate defective or vulnerable
code [18]–[22] that could be exploited for malicious purposes.
The proliferation of code plagiarism presents another signifi-
cant challenge, where malicious actors may appropriate open-
source code, apply minor modifications, and redistribute it as
original work. These challenges underscore the urgent need
for robust mechanisms to accurately and effectively trace code
provenance.
Similar to text watermarking [23]–[26], code watermarking
presents a viable approach for this purpose by embedding
invisible signatures within code to identify its creators [27]–
[29]. However, unlike natural language, code watermarking
must preserve both semantic and functional correctness. Cur-
rent code watermarking schemes primarily adopt two schemes:
black-box and white-box watermarking. Black-box water-
marking processes the generated code to embed detectable fea-
tures. However, these transformation-based methods typically
exhibit fixed or isomorphic syntactic patterns, rendering the
watermark detectable under differential analysis and making
them vulnerable to theft or forgery [30]. Moreover, end-to-
end black-box watermarking methods often rely on implic-
itly learned embedding behaviors, making the watermarking
process less interpretable and auditable, while also limiting
precise control over watermark encoding and recovery. White-
box watermarking operates during the Code LLM decod-
ing process, employing constraint strategies to select tokens
suitable for adding watermark while minimizing impact on
overall code quality. These methods encode watermarks by
partitioning the vocabulary into green/red lists and sampling
tokens exclusively from the green list. Nevertheless, these ap-
proaches lack syntactic code analysis capabilities, potentially
compromising code functionality.
Furthermore, the widespread deployment of Code LLMs
has introduced increasingly complex provenance requirements,
including internal leak source identification, version track-
ing, and multi-contributor responsibility attribution [31], [32].
Addressing these scenarios requires flexible watermarking
frameworks capable of embedding customized and highly
distinguishable watermarks within a unified system. However,
existing methods largely adopt a coarse-grained, single-layer
arXiv:2604.16001v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
Fig. 1: Single- versus Multi-layer Watermarking. Single-layer
watermarking must split the sequence to encode both orga-
nization and model identities, limiting flexibility. Multi-layer
watermarking enables each layer to independently use the
sequence for more flexible and fine-grained attribution.
tracing paradigm that directly binds each attribution target to
a single watermark sequence, as illustrated in Figure 1. Such a
design is inadequate for fine-grained, multi-layer provenance
tasks and fails to fully exploit the available watermark space,
thereby limiting watermarking efficiency and adaptability.
Our Work. To address these limitations, we propose MATRIX,
a novel framework for embedding watermark sequences into
source code snippets. MATRIX employs a series of equivalent
syntactic transformations and variable renaming operations to
ensure the semantic and functional integrity of watermarked
code. The framework formulates the watermark encoding pro-
cess as solving constrained parity-check matrix equations to
guarantee watermark detectability, where different users need
only maintain their respective parity-check matrices without
the costly modification of transformation rules. Furthermore,
MATRIX utilizes a dual-channel mechanism: both natural
channel (through variable name substitution) and formal chan-
nel (through semantic-preserving transformations) [33]–[36]
to enhance watermark coverage and provide mutual backup
for enhanced robustness. The framework also utilizes the
error-correction space of BCH codes [37], [38] and the non-
uniqueness of equation solutions to ensure watermark covert-
ness against statistical analysis. Through this design, MATRIX
achieves an optimal balance among the critical watermarking
objectives, including detectability, fidelity, and robustness.
Through extensive experiments on Python code generated
by multiple Code LLMs and prompt datasets, we demon-
strate MATRIX’s superior performance compared to existing
baselines. MATRIX effectively preserves code functionality
with a loss rate between 0% and 0.14%, achieves an average
watermark detection accuracy of 99.20%, and attains up to
100.0% watermark information extraction accuracy. Under
variable renaming attacks and LLM-based code refactoring
attacks, MATRIX outperforms baselines with improvements of
7.70-21.72% against various attacks, in watermark detection
accuracy, respectively. Against statistical analysis, MATRIX
exhibits more dispersed anchor states than baselines, effec-
tively enhancing watermark indistinguishability. Moreover,
MATRIX significantly expand the watermarking coverage by
approximately 6 times compared to ACW on APPS, and twice
as many on HumanEval and MBPP. These results demonstrate
that MATRIX achieves broad applicability while effectively
balancing detectability, fidelity, and robustness. Additionally,
by mitigating the isomorphic syntactic patterns inherent in
rule-based watermarking, MATRIX significantly improves ro-
bustness against statistical analysis.
Contributions. Our work’s contribution is summarized below:
• Novel watermarking framework. We formulate water-
mark encoding as solving constrained parity-check matrix
equations, enabling flexible multi-layer provenance. Our
implementation is available at replication package [39].
• Fine-grained watermarking capabilities. We introduce
natural channels (variable naming) and formal channels
(semantic-preserving transformations) to expand watermark
coverage while providing mutual backup for enhanced ro-
bustness.
• BCH-enhanced
covertness. We leverage BCH error-
correction codes and solution space diversity to ensure
watermark covertness against statistical analysis while main-
taining robustness.
• Superior performance. MATRIX achieves average 99.20%
detection accuracy, near-perfect code functionality, 7.70-
21.72% improved robustness, and 2-6× more watermarkable
samples than baselines.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. LLM Code Watermarking
With the rise of Code LLMs, code watermarking has
emerged to embed creator identity. Unlike natural language,
code requires semantic and functional preservation, making
watermarking more challenging. The process consists of two
abstract phases:
Embedding Phase. Given a piece of code and an identity mes-
sage m (representing the code creator), we first encode it into
a binary watermark sequence w = E(m). The watermark is
then embedded by applying a transformation function Fembed,
resulting in a watermarked version:
code′ = Fembed(code, w)
(1)
Detection Phase. Given a code snippet, we attempt to extract
a watermark sequence using a detection function:
ˆw = Fdetect(code′)
(2)
Existing code watermarking methods can be broadly cate-
gorized into two types:
Black-box Watermarking can be modeled as a constrained
transformation problem, where a target bit sequence is mapped
to a set of semantics-preserving transformations applied to
code. Let C denote the original source code, and let T =
{t1, t2, ..., tn} be a set of transformations, each ti : C →C
preserving program functionality. To embed a watermark bit
sequence w ∈{0, 1}n, the system applies a subset of trans-
formations Tw ⊆T such that:
wi =
(
1,
if ti to be applied to C,
0,
otherwise
(3)
The goal is to construct a transformed code C′ as:
C′ = t1 ◦t2 ◦· · · ◦tk(C),
where Ti ∈Tw.
In the detection phase, the system analyzes C′ to identify
the subset of transformations ˆT ⊆T that have been applied,
yielding an extracted bit sequence ˆw ∈{0, 1}n.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
End-to-end black-box watermarking. Unlike rule-based
methods with explicit bit-to-transformation mappings, end-to-
end black-box watermarking directly takes the original code
C and the message m as input and generates the watermarked
code C′:
C′ = Gθ(C, m),
(4)
where Gθ is a parameterized watermark embedding model.
Correspondingly, watermark recovery is usually performed by
another parameterized model Dϕ:
ˆm = Dϕ(C′).
(5)
White-box Watermarking. Let V denote the full vocabulary
of the LLM, at each token generation step st, a deterministic or
pseudorandom partitioning strategy splits V into two disjoint
subsets: V (st)
green and V (st)
red . Only tokens from V (st)
green are eligi-
ble for watermark embedding. Let Embed(st) ∈{0, 1} denote
whether the t-th position satisfies the embedding condition
(e.g., the token does not affect control flow or program
correctness):
Embed(st) =
(
1,
if position st is safe for watermarking,
0,
otherwise.
(6)
This condition filters out unsafe positions where altering the
output could harm functionality. Token sampling at step st
proceeds as follows. If Embed(st) = 0, perform standard
sampling. If Embed(st) = 1, constrain sampling to the green
list:
xt ∼LM(· | x<st)

V (st)
green.
(7)
In the detection phase, given a generated sequence x,
watermark detection scans positions that satisfy the embedding
condition and computes the proportion of tokens pgreen that
appear in the green list, a watermark is considered present if
pgreen exceeds a predefined threshold τ.
B. Threat Model and Property Requirements
Threat Model. The code watermark is embedded into
LLM-generated code before distribution, so the attacker never
observes the unwatermarked version. The attacker knows the
high-level framework of our scheme but not the concrete
transformation rules or anchor definitions: an assumption that
is practical for code watermarking [40], since full knowledge
of these rules would allow an adversary to deterministically
rewrite all affected constructs and trivially strip the watermark.
The attacker receives only the watermarked code and aims
to remove or corrupt the watermark while preserving func-
tionality. We consider strong end-user adversaries who may
apply Variable renaming, Rule-based refactoring, LLM-based
rewriting, or Code reformatting.
Property Requirements. Based on the threat model, We
outline the core requirements for a practical and resilient code
watermarking system:
Detectibility. The watermark should be reliably embedded and
accurately extracted, with minimal overhead.
Fdetect(Fembed(code, w)) = w
(8)
Robustness. The watermark should remain intact and verifi-
able under the threat model. Formally:
Fdetect(A(Fembed(code, w))) = w
(9)
where A denotes a transformation that preserves the function-
ality of the original code.
Fidelity. The watermarking process should preserve the pro-
gram’s original functionality and behavior.
semantics(Fembed(code, w)) = semantics(code).
(10)
Indistinguishability. The watermark should remain indistin-
guishable even when an adversary observes multiple ver-
sions of the same code embedded with different messages.
To prevent leakage, transformation patterns must not exhibit
statistically significant correlations with the embedded bits.
Otherwise, a sophisticated attacker could analyze variations
across watermarked instances, such as differences in anchor
activations, and correlate them with known messages to infer
the encoding scheme.
Flexibility. The framework should support fine-grained, multi-
layer attribution without requiring structural changes to the en-
coding system. In complex scenarios, such as identifying both
an organization and an individual, the scheme should enable
expressive reuse of the full watermark space, avoiding rigid
bit partitioning and expensive modifications to transformation
rules.
To provide a comparative overview of existing code wa-
termarking techniques, we summarize several representative
methods in Table I, highlighting their respective strengths and
limitations in terms of the properties.
C. Limitations of Existing Approaches
Black-box Watermarking. While simple and modular,
Black-box watermarking is mechanical and rigid: For a given
message m, the watermarking function produces a single, fixed
transformation sequence Tw. This one-to-one mapping,
m
Encode
−−−−→w
Transform
−−−−−→Tw −→C′
(11)
leads to consistent syntactic patterns in C′. As a result,
an adversary can perform statistical analysis over multiple
watermarked samples to infer transformation–bit correspon-
dences, undermining indistinguishability. Besides, each bit
wi is typically tied to a single transformation Ti, with no
alternative pathways or fallback strategies. This yields a fragile
representation:
ˆwi = I[Ti is still present in C′]
(12)
where ˆwi is the extracted bit. If Ti is removed or altered during
downstream processing or attack, ˆwi is corrupted. Without
redundancy, the system lacks robustness against even minor
perturbations.
End-to-end black-box watermarking. End-to-end black-box
watermarking avoids explicit handcrafted rules and offers
greater flexibility, but the mapping between message bits and
code transformations is implicitly encoded in model parame-
ters. As a result, such methods are weaker in interpretability,
auditability, and fine-grained controllability.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
TABLE I: Comparison of Existing Methods
Type
Method
Detectability
Robustness
Fidelity
Indistinguishability
Black-Box
ToSyn [32]
ACW [41]
CodeMark [42]
SrcMarker [43]
RoseMary [44]
White-Box
SWEET [45]
CodeIP [46]
STA-M [47]
STONE [48]
MCGMark [49]
White-box Watermarking. As shown in Equation 7, wa-
termarking is only applied at positions where Embed(st) = 1,
indicating local suitability for watermark insertion. However,
these constraints are typically based on local token-level
heuristics and lack a global understanding of code structure.
Consequently, even when all watermarked tokens are locally
valid (i.e., xst ∈V (st)
green when Embed(st) = 1), the resulting
sequence may still violate global syntactic or semantic correct-
ness: x /∈Cvalid, where Cvalid denotes the set of functionally
correct programs. This limitation is especially critical for code,
where subtle dependencies across distant tokens can easily
break compilability or functionality.
Our Technique. To address the limitations of existing water-
marking formulations and satisfy key requirements such as fi-
delity, robustness, and detectability, we propose a set of design
strategies. We retain semantic-preserving code transformations
in black-box watermarking to ensure fidelity, while main-
taining better interpretability and auditability than end-to-end
embedding methods. We further introduce randomized mech-
anisms to improve indistinguishability by increasing variation
and reducing detectability through pattern inference. Finally,
we incorporate redundancy through complementary channels
and solution multiplicity to improve robustness against code
perturbations.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Definition
We begin by defining key concepts used throughout the
introduction of the methodology.
Identity Message (m). The identity message m is a unique
bitstring that represents the code creator and serves as the
semantic source for watermark generation. It is typically
expressed as a bit sequence in {0, 1}k, where k denotes the
length of the message.
Watermark Sequence (w). The watermark sequence w ∈
{0, 1}l is a bitstring derived from the identity message m
using BCH encoding. This process transforms m into a longer
codeword by appending redundancy bits to enable error correc-
tion: w = BCHEncode(m). Instead of directly using the exact
BCH codeword, we randomly select w from the set of valid
codewords within the error-correcting radius of m. This strat-
egy enhances indistinguishability by obscuring the one-to-one
correspondence between m and w. Specifically, a BCH code
over a finite field GF(q) is defined by parameters (l, k, e)q,
where l is the watermark sequence length, k is the identity
message length, and e is the error-correcting capability. The
sequence w serves as the semantic watermark to be embedded
and is later mapped to concrete code transformations during
the embedding phase. Compared to m, w is more robust and
stealthy, due to redundancy and obfuscation introduced by the
BCH encoding process.
Transformation Rule (t). A semantics-preserving transfor-
mation rule should support two inverse operations: apply and
reverse, which transform and restore code elements, respec-
tively. For example, we can apply the Loop-to-Comprehension
Transformation to convert for i in range(N): L[i]
= i into L = [i for i in range(N)], and likewise
reverse the transformation to recover the original loop-based
form.
Anchor Point (a). Given a sorted set of semantics-preserving
transformation rules T = {t1, t2, . . . , tn}, an anchor point is a
location in the code where a transformation operation ti can be
either applied or reversed. Each anchor point has a binary state
s indicating whether it is to be transformed with ti, defined
as follows:
s =
(
1,
if the transformation to be applied,
0,
otherwise.
(13)
The state s is determined by the transformation rule in T that
can be applied or reversed at that location.
State Vector (r). The state vector of a given code is defined
as
r = (s1, s2, . . . , sp) ∈{0, 1}p,
(14)
where p is the total number of anchor points in the code,
and si denotes the state of the i-th anchor point. This vector
specifies which anchor points will be transformed using their
corresponding transformation rules.
Grouped State Vector (c). Let a group Gi be a set of multiple
anchor points. The state of Gi is set to 1 if the number of
transformed anchor points in the group meets or exceeds a
threshold τ; otherwise, it is set to 0. The grouped state vector
is defined as
c = (c1, c2, . . . , cq) ∈{0, 1}q,
(15)
where q is the total number of groups, and ci denotes the state
of the i-th group.
B. System Overview
Our system, MATRIX, consists of a watermark insertion and
a watermark extraction module, as illustrated in Figure 2. The
watermarking system maintains two predefined, fixed-order
transformation sets: a set of semantics-preserving transforma-
tions TF and a list of variable renaming schemes TV .
During the watermark insertion process (shown in Algo-
rithm 1), given a message m and a code snippet C, appropriate
watermark sequences w and parity-check matrices M ∈Fk×n
2
are selected for each channel based on the number of available
anchor points. In both channels, the problem of computing the
state vector is formulated as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem
(CSP), ensuring consistency with the selected watermark se-
quence. The corresponding transformations are then applied
according to the solution, yielding a watermarked version of
the code C′.
In the watermark extraction phase, the input is the poten-
tially watermarked code C′. MATRIX identifies the anchor

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
Fig. 2: Overall Workflow of MATRIX
points and their states in both channels, selects the corre-
sponding parity-check matrices M, and verifies whether the
extracted state vectors satisfy the parity-check equations used
during insertion. If the verification succeeds, the embedded
watermark sequence w is recovered, and the original identity
message m is reconstructed.
By simply changing the configuration of the parity-check
matrix, without modifying the transformation sets TF and TV ,
MATRIX can flexibly support both inter-organizational and
intra-organizational provenance tracing.
C. Anchor Points Identification and Grouping
Anchor Points Identification (Alg 1 line 2). For the given
code snippet C, we perform static analysis on it to identify
anchor points in both channels. Specifically, we extract the set
of formal channel anchor points F (based on TF ) and the set
of natural channel anchor points V (based on TV ). We then
sort the anchor points in a consistent, fixed order. For F, the
ordering follows the predefined sequence of rules in TF . For
V , the ordering is determined by a fixed heuristic. Notably,
in the natural channel, some variable names may naturally
match one or more renaming variants defined in TV . To ensure
consistent ordering during both embedding and extraction, all
such variants are first reverted to their untransformed (original)
form prior to sorting. We reasonably assume that the sorting
function is kept secret from potential attackers.
Anchor Points Grouping (Alg 1 line 3). For the formal
channel, the anchor set F is partitioned into groups of size
α, i.e., consecutive α anchor points, and the first n groups
are selected in order. For the natural channel, all renaming
variants of a variable constitute a group, and the first n such
groups are likewise selected. Here, n = |w|, so that each group
corresponds to a bit wi in the watermark sequence. A fixed
group threshold τ ∈N is used to define the group state vector
c. For each group, the group state ci is directly determined by
the corresponding bit wi: ci = wi.
D. Adaptive Embedding Capacity Estimation
Given the number of available anchor points in F and
V , MATRIX first estimates the embedding capacity and ac-
cordingly selects an appropriate watermark sequence w and a
parity-check matrix M. There are three possible cases:
Algorithm 1 Watermark Insertion
Input: Original code C, identity message m, rule sets TF , TV , group
size α, threshold τ
Output: Watermarked code C′
1: Step 1: Anchor Points Identification and Grouping
2: Identify anchor sets F and V from C using TF and TV
3: Let the anchor points in F and V be grouped such that each
group contains α anchor points;
4: Step 2: Adaptive Embedding Capacity Estimation
5: for each anchor set {F, V } do
6:
n ←number of anchors
7:
if n ≥α · |w| then
8:
w ←BCHEncode(m)
9:
else if α < n < α · |w| then
10:
w ←m
11:
end if
12:
select M that rows(M) = |w|
13:
if n < α then
14:
w ←organization code
15:
M ←unit parity-check matrix
16:
end if
17: end for
18: Step 3: State Vector Computation
19: Set grouped state vector c such that ci = wi for all i
20: Solve:





M · r ≡c
(mod 2)
ci = 1 ⇒P
j∈Gi sj ≥τ
ci = 0 ⇒P
j∈Gi sj < τ
(16)
21: Select a valid solution r = (s1, . . . , sn) from the solution space
22: Step 4: State Vector Application
23: for each anchor point i in F ∪V do
24:
if si = 1 then
25:
Apply forward transformation at anchor i
26:
else
27:
Apply reverse transformation at anchor i
28:
end if
29: end for
30: return C′
Case 1: Sufficient anchor points for both grouping and
BCH-encoded watermark (Alg 1 line 5-8). If the number
of anchor points n satisfies n ≥α · |w|, it is sufficient for
grouping. Here, w is the BCH-encoded watermark sequence
derived from the identity message m.
Case 2: Sufficient anchor points for grouping, but not for
the BCH-encoded sequence (Alg 1 line 9-11). If the above

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
condition cannot be satisfied, we fall back to using the identity
message directly as the watermark sequence: w = m. If n ≥
α · |w| is satisfied, grouping can still be performed.
Case 3: Insufficient anchor points for grouping (Alg 1 line
13-16). In extreme cases where the number of anchor points
(e.g., 1 or 2) is insufficient even for the minimal grouping
requirement, a fixed watermark sequence w predefined by the
organization is used to ensure basic feasibility of detection
and verification. For the first two cases (Alg 1 line 12), a
parity-check matrix M is selected to match the length of w,
satisfying rows(M) = |w| and
cols(M) = |w| · α. For the
third case (Alg 1 line 15.) , a unit (identity) parity-check matrix
M is used.
E. Watermark Insertion
Given an LLM-generated code snippet C and an original
message m, MATRIX first identifies anchor points as described
in Section III-C, then computes and applies the state vector.
State Vector Computation (Alg 1 line 18-20). In both
channels, the problem of determining the state vector is
formulated as a Constraint Satisfaction Problem (CSP). Under
the grouped state constraints, we solve the following system
of linear equations over the binary field:





M · r ≡c
(mod 2)
ci = 1 =⇒P
j∈Gi sj ≥τ
ci = 0 =⇒P
j∈Gi sj < τ
(17)
Here, r is the state vector to be determined, M is the
parity-check matrix, and c is the grouped state vector derived
from the watermark sequence w. The solution ensures that
the computed anchor point states are consistent with the
watermark bit assignments specified at the group level.
Let the solution space of the equation system be denoted
by R. A solution:
r = (s1, s2, . . . , sn) ∈{0, 1}n
(18)
is randomly selected from R and returned as the state vector.
If the system has no solution, MATRIX resamples an alterna-
tive watermark sequence w′ derived from the same identity
message and retries the solving process.
State Vector Application. (Alg 1 line 21-29) Given the com-
puted state vectors rF and rV for the formal and natural chan-
nels respectively, MATRIX iterates through each anchor point
and applies the corresponding transformation. Specifically, for
an anchor point with state 1, the associated forward transfor-
mation is applied; for a state of 0, the reverse transformation
is used to preserve its original form. This process produces the
final watermarked code C′, which reflects the encoded identity
in a semantically equivalent yet syntactically altered version
of the original code. For example, if r = (1, 0, 1, 0), the first
and third anchor points are transformed, while the second and
fourth remain unchanged.
F. Watermark Extraction
Given a code snippet C′ with unknown watermarking status,
MATRIX first identifies anchor points F and V and then
preforms the following process.
State Vector Reconstruction. MATRIX reconstructs the cor-
responding state vectors rF and rV using the following rule.
For each anchor point in F or V , its state is determined as:
s =
(
1,
if the transformation can be reversed,
0,
otherwise.
(19)
After evaluating all anchor points, the state vectors rF and
rV are reconstructed as bit sequences, indicating which anchor
points are likely to have had transformation rules applied.
Parity-Check Matrix Determination. Based on the number
of anchor points, MATRIX retrieves the parity-check matrices
MF and MV using the same selection strategy as in Sec-
tion III-C. If C′ contains an intact watermark, the recovered
matrices are expected to match those used during insertion.
Watermark Sequence Derivation. The group state vector c′
is derived by applying the fixed thresholding strategy over
anchor point groups, following the same grouping scheme
in Section III-C. The recovered watermark sequence w′ is
computed accordingly.
Watermark Verification. For each channel, MATRIX checks
whether the following condition holds:
M · r ≡c′
(mod 2)
(20)
If the condition is satisfied in at least one channel, C′ is
deemed to contain a valid watermark. In this case, w′ is taken
as the embedded watermark sequence, and the corresponding
identity message m′ can be recovered from w′.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we present the empirical evaluation of MA-
TRIX. We begin by introducing the overall experimental setup
in Section IV-A. Then, we evaluate the detection and extraction
accuracy of watermark identification in Section IV-B and
Section IV-C. The robustness of MATRIX against common
code transformations and optimization attacks is analyzed in
Section IV-D. Next, we assess the functional transparency
of the watermarked code and its impact on usability in
Section IV-E. We further examine the indistinguishability of
watermark patterns under statistical analysis in Section IV-F.
Finally, Section IV-G provides a detailed case study illustrating
how MATRIX behaves under representative real-world attacks.
A. Setup
Baselines. We compare MATRIX with state-of-the-art open
source baselines for watermarking LLM-generated code.
ACW [41] is a black-box watermarking method. It selectively
applies a set of carefully designed semantics-preserving, idem-
potent code transformations whose presence or absence is used
to determine whether a watermark is embedded. SWEET [45]
is a white-box watermarking approach for code generated
by LLMs. It optimizes the decoding procedure of KGW
[50] by introducing an entropy threshold, thereby encoding
watermarks exclusively in high-entropy tokens.
Datasets. We generate Python code using GPT-4 [51] across
three benchmarks: MBPP [52], APPS [53], and HumanEval
[54]. In addition, to enable a comparison with SWEET, we also
generate code using StarCoder [55] on the HumanEval and
MBPP benchmarks. All datasets contain instruction prompts

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
for code generation, human-written canonical solutions, and
test cases for functionality evaluation. Following the approach
of Li et al. [41], we remove code snippets with fewer than
five lines, as such very short fragments typically have limited
value for traceability or copyright analysis. We systematically
apply the watermarking scheme to these datasets and compare
the results against the original datasets without watermarking.
Implementation. For the formal channel, we define a
set of semantic-preserving transformations, detailed in the
replication package [39]. For the natural channel, we define
three ordered renaming strategies for each variable, resulting
in group sizes of 3 as shown in Table II. These independent
and reversible transformations allow us to accurately recover
anchor states via static analysis during detection, without extra
metadata. In contrast, since ACW cannot detect anchors that
are naturally in the transformed state, we additionally record
the anchors used during embedding and reuse them during
watermark detection to improve reliability. For practicality, we
treat channels with an all-zero state vector as unwatermarked,
since it indicates no transformations were applied. To avoid
this case, we never embed messages whose encoded watermark
yields an all-zero vector. Instead, we randomly select a nearby
valid codeword within the BCH error tolerance to replace it,
ensuring the watermark remains detectable.
TABLE II: Available Variable Conversions
Name
Description
Underline
Add an underline to the end of the variable.
Initial Capitalization
Capitalize the first letter of a variable.
Suffix
Select a suffix from the given list of suffixes
based on the context, and add it to the end of
the variable.
We conducted the watermarking operations on StarCoder
using a server equipped with eight NVIDIA Tesla V100 SXM2
GPUs (32GB memory each, NVLink). For the GPT-4-related
watermarking operations, we used a PC with an 11th Gen
Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-11800H CPU (2.30GHz), 16GB DDR4
RAM, running Windows 11.
B. Watermark Accuracy
Table III presents the detailed results of MATRIX and the
baselines in attributing the watermark, including TPR and
FPR. Specifically, for MATRIX, we additionally provide the
TPR for both the Natural Channel and the Formal Channel, as
well as the FPR under strict detection conditions (MATRIX-
Strict, under which the code is considered watermark-free if
either channel indicates no watermark).
Note that the dataset names in the table follow the format
of benchmark-model. For instance, APPS-G refers to code
generated by GPT-4 on the APPS dataset, while MBPP-S
denotes code generated by StarCoder on the MBPP dataset.
Overall Results. MATRIX demonstrates strong performance
across all datasets. For example, on MBPP-G, MATRIX
achieves a TPR of 100.00%, and on HumanEval-S, a FPR
of 0. These results show that MATRIX can accurately iden-
tify the presence of watermarks (in terms of TPR) while
effectively avoiding false positives (in terms of FPR). The
few cases where watermarks are not correctly detected on
Formal Channel are due to edge cases in static analysis, which
caused anchor state transformations to fail. In our dual-channel
watermarking scheme, the FPR is slightly higher due to the
backup mechanism, where a watermark is considered present
if either channel detects it. While this enhances robustness, it
also increases the FPR. To address this, we also evaluate FPR
under stricter conditions, where both channels must detect the
watermark. Under these conditions, the FPR is much lower,
illustrating the trade-off between dual-channel robustness and
increased false positives.
Compared to SWEET. SWEET improves KGW [50] by
restricting watermark decoding to high-entropy tokens to pre-
serve code quality while maintaining detectability, this ap-
proach does mitigate the degradation of code quality caused by
altering critical tokens. However, it also reduces the density of
“green” tokens in the code, thereby weakening the watermark
strength. Compared to MATRIX, the watermark detection TPR
decreases by 61.59% on average.
Compared to ACW. Compared to ACW, MATRIX demon-
strates consistently high TPR across all datasets, without
requiring additional records of the anchors used during water-
marking. This improvement can be attributed to the fact that
small implementation errors may occur during transformations
in practice. ACW determines watermark presence by checking
whether applying the same transformations repeatedly yields
an identical result on a continuous sequence of several anchors.
If error arises during watermark embedding, the watermark
becomes undetectable. In contrast, MATRIX’s dual-channel
backup mechanism ensures that even if one channel fails, the
other still reliably preserve the watermark.
Cross-Organizational
Attribution.
Beyond
detecting
whether
a
watermark
exists,
MATRIX
supports
cross-
organization attribution—the ability to distinguish watermarks
applied by different organizations using distinct parity-check
matrices. By simply changing the matrix without altering
any system-level settings, MATRIX enables accurate multi-
layer tracking of both organizations and individuals. To
evaluate this, we simulate multiple organizations (O1, O2,
O3), each assigned a unique parity-check matrix, and test
whether MATRIX can correctly attribute watermarks to the
originating organization (O). A higher TPR indicates that
these organizations did not mistakenly claim ownership of
code produced by O.
Analysis. Table IV shows that MATRIX achieves high true
positive rates (TPRs) for distinguishing organizational owner-
ship, with values typically above 95% and reaching 100% on
several datasets, confirming that detectors rarely misidentify
watermarks from other organizations as their own. The small
variations across organizations (typically 3–5%) suggest minor
overlaps between the encoding spaces of distinct parity-check
matrices. Overall, these results demonstrate that MATRIX
effectively preserves cross-organization exclusivity while sup-
porting scalable multi-layer attribution. This validates the scal-
ability of our parity-check–based design for multi-organization
deployment without system-level reconfiguration.
Watermark Insertion Overhead. We also conduct a prelim-
inary runtime evaluation, and find that watermark embedding

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
TABLE III: Evaluation Results on Discriminability
A

[…middle truncated for length…]

ses formatting tools to sanitize or standardize
the code’s formatting. We instruct pyrefact [56] to refactor
the code, GPT-4o [57] to rewrite, and black [58] to reformat.
Figure 3 shows a comparison of MATRIX and the baselines
on datasets containing dual-channel watermarks.
Analysis. As shown in Figure 3, MATRIX consistently outper-
forms SWEET and ACW across all four attack types on both
HumanEval and MBPP datasets.
Under VA, where variable identifiers are randomly replaced,
MATRIX maintains TPRs of 96–98.67%, far exceeding ACW
(72.00%) and SWEET (20.98%). This robustness arises from
MATRIX’s dual-channel redundancy: when one channel’s an-
chors are perturbed, the other can still recover the watermark.
In contrast, ACW’s performance drops because one of its
watermarking rules depends on sorting variables by name;
renaming disrupts that ordering. SWEET is even more vulnera-
ble, as renaming changes the tokenization structure: a variable
that originally spanned two tokens might expand to five after
renaming, misaligning the token groups used for watermark
extraction.
For RA, in which pyrefact restructures the program with-
out altering semantics, MATRIX again achieves high TPRs
(92–98%), while ACW and SWEET degrade sharply. The
dual-channel backup mechanism allows MATRIX to tolerate
such structural transformations. ACW fails because rule-based
refactoring invalidates several of its transformation-dependent
Fig. 3: Robustness evaluation results under Variable-rename
Attack (VA), Refactor Attack (RA), LLM-based Rewriting
Attack (LA), and Reformat Attack (FA).
watermark rules, while SWEET suffers from disrupted token
grouping similar to VA.
In the more challenging LA, where GPT-4o regenerates the
code with modified syntax, structure, and comments, MATRIX
achieves TPRs of 53.85% and 51.05% on HumanEval and
MBPP, respectively—about 5–10 percentage points higher
than ACW and more than triple SWEET’s accuracy. These
results reflect the advantage of MATRIX’s parity-check en-
coding, where the diversity of valid solution spaces enables
partial recovery even when both channels are simultaneously
perturbed.
Under FA using black, MATRIX retains nearly perfect TPRs
(97–100%), showing invariance to purely stylistic formatting
changes. In contrast, ACW performs poorly because format-
ting transformations are part of its watermarking rule set; when
external tools reformat the code, those transformations produce
inconsistent outcomes that invalidate the watermark. SWEET
also fails due to token-sequence misalignment, as formatting

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
changes shift the token boundaries used for watermark group-
ing.
Overall, MATRIX’s robustness derives from two comple-
mentary mechanisms: (i) redundant dual-channel encoding,
where the natural and formal channels provide mutual backup,
and (ii) solution-space diversity in the parity-check system,
ensuring that perturbed state vectors that remain within the
valid subspace still yield correct watermark recovery.
Benefiting from the diverse solution space of its
parity-check encoding and the redundancy of its
dual-channel design, MATRIX demonstrates strong ro-
bustness against Variable-Renaming and Rule-based
Refactoring Attacks, and maintains reliable detection
under the more challenging LLM-based Rewriting At-
tack. Moreover, its format-independent watermarking
mechanism ensures complete immunity to Reformat
Attacks.
E. Fidelity
To verify that watermarking does not compromise code
functionality, we conduct an experiment comparing the unit
test pass rates of code before and after watermark embedding.
We partition the dataset into unwatermarked and watermarked
code samples. It is important to note that, due to the limited
generation capabilities of LLMs, the pass rate of the original
generated code was not 100.00%.
Analysis. As shown in Table VIII, MATRIX effectively pre-
serves the functionality of the generated code, achieving neg-
ligible degradation across all datasets. For example, on APPS,
the pass rate drops by only 0.14%, and remains completely
unchanged on HumanEval and MBPP, confirming that the
embedding and extraction procedures introduce no semantic
or syntactic disruption. This demonstrates that MATRIX main-
tains code correctness even under extensive watermarking.
In comparison, ACW shows slightly higher but still accept-
able degradation (under 0.2%), since small implementation
errors may occur during transformations in practice. SWEET,
however, experiences noticeable degradation: up to 7.60% on
MBPP-S and 2.44% on HumanEval-S. The performance drop
originates from its watermarking mechanism, which injects
constraints into the LLM decoding process. Although SWEET
avoids watermarking low-entropy or critical tokens, the lack
of a global syntactic view can cause inconsistencies between
modified and unmodified code regions, leading to broken
dependencies and failed test cases.
MATRIX uses semantically equivalent code trans-
formations to embed the watermark, ensuring near-
lossless embedding with minimal impact on code
functionality.
F. Indistinguishability under Statistical Analysis
As discussed in Section II-B, a strong adversary may
obtain multiple watermarked variants of the same code and
TABLE VIII: Evaluation results on Pass Rate.
Dataset
Pass Rate(%)
Degradation(%)
Before
After
ACW
APPS-G
68.01
67.81
0.20
HumanEval-G
82.32
82.32
0.00
MBPP-G
71.28
71.28
0.00
HumanEval-S
35.98
35.98
0.00
MBPP-S
50.40
50.40
0.00
SWEET
HumanEval-S
35.98
33.54
2.44
MBPP-S
50.40
42.80
7.60
MATRIX
APPS-G
68.01
67.87
0.14
HumanEval-G
82.32
82.32
0.00
MBPP-G
71.28
71.28
0.00
HumanEval-S
35.98
35.98
0.00
MBPP-S
50.40
50.40
0.00
Fig. 4: Activation Frequency of MATRIX, Each curve rep-
resents a different watermark, with the y-axis showing the
frequency of anchor activation (state 1) across all samples.
analyze anchor activation patterns to infer anchor–bit map-
pings, enabling possible watermark removal or manipulation.
We therefore evaluate MATRIX’s resistance to such statisti-
cal inference by comparing its activation patterns and intra-
watermark diversity against ACW.
We define ϵ-indistinguishability: For any two watermark
messages m0 and m1, the distributions of anchor activations
P(A | m0) and P(A | m1) are indistinguishable if, for
any adversary A, |Pr[AttackA(m0)] −Pr[AttackA(m1)]| ≤ϵ,
where ϵ represents the maximum distinguishing advantage.
Smaller ϵ indicates stronger indistinguishability.
Anchor activation analysis. Figure 4 reports the activation
frequencies of 12 anchors under four watermark messages
(0000, 0101, 1010, 1111). For ACW, each bit deterministically
drives a designated anchor (e.g., “1010” triggers anchors 1–4).
This one-to-one mapping yields near-binary activation curves
that are clearly separable across messages, exposing highly
predictable statistical structure that an adversary could readily
exploit to recover the bit–anchor mapping.
By contrast, MATRIX exhibits stochastic and overlap-
ping activation behavior. Anchor activation frequencies vary
smoothly between roughly 0.3 and 0.9 across watermark
messages, and no anchor consistently responds to any par-
ticular bit. To quantify ϵ-indistinguishability, we compare
the activation distributions using Jensen–Shannon divergence
(JSD) and mutual information (MI). Across 12 anchors and
6 message pairs (72 comparisons), the average JSD is only

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
0.0479 (max 0.1704), indicating substantial overlap between
distributions. The MI is similarly low (avg. 0.0479 nats),
implying that all anchors combined leak < 1 bit about the
4-bit watermark—insufficient for any meaningful message
inference. These results show that MATRIX substantially limits
statistical distinguishability: anchor activations reveal no stable
bit-dependent patterns, and the information available to an
adversary is far below the threshold needed to reconstruct or
even partially infer the embedded watermark.
Intra-watermark diversity. Figure 5 evaluates whether an
adversary, after collecting many samples carrying the same
watermark, could identify stable structural signatures. The
heatmap plots the pairwise Hamming similarity of 100 wa-
termarked samples. Instead of collapsing to a single canonical
pattern, the similarities span a broad range (0.3–0.8), indicat-
ing that MATRIX produces many distinct state vectors for the
same message.
This variability stems from the randomized BCH mapping
and the multiplicity of valid solutions to the parity-check
constraints. Crucially, this means an adversary cannot isolate
invariant features or derive a reliable template characterizing a
watermark message—even when the watermark bits are fixed.
Unlike ACW, which yields one deterministic state vector per
message, MATRIX provides no consistent structural anchor
that could support clustering or pattern-matching attacks.
These results show that MATRIX preserves strong intra-
message unpredictability: repeated samples leak no stable bit-
dependent structure and therefore offer no actionable signal
for reconstructing, distinguishing, or reverse-engineering wa-
termark assignments. This statistical dispersion acts as an
additional defense layer beyond activation-distribution indis-
tinguishability, further limiting the adversary’s ability to infer
internal encoding rules from observation alone.
MATRIX’s checksum-matrix construction and random-
ized BCH mapping reduce anchor-activation pre-
dictability, improving resistance to statistical inference.
Even with many samples, adversaries cannot reliably
distinguish watermark-induced transformations from
natural code variations.
G. Case Study
While the previous sections evaluate MATRIX statistically,
here we present a detailed case study to illustrate how it
behaves under concrete attack instances.
Figures 6a and 6b illustrate MATRIX’s robustness under
single-channel attacks. In these cases, the adversary heavily
rewrites one channel: either by renaming most variables in the
formal channel or by altering sentence structures in the natural
channel. However, the other channel remains unaffected and
still provides a valid anchor state vector that satisfies the
parity-check constraints. Since MATRIX embeds codeword
redundantly across both channels, the decoder can recover the
watermark from the intact channel, demonstrating that severe
corruption of one channel does not compromise watermark
extraction.
Fig. 5: Pairwise similarity heatmap of MATRIX
Figure 6c illustrates the resilience of MATRIX under simul-
taneous dual-channel attacks. In this scenario, the adversary
rewrites nearly all variable names in the formal channel and
completely disrupts the natural-channel structures. Despite
these extensive modifications, the resulting anchor state vector
remains within the feasible solution space defined by the veri-
fication matrix. This indicates that the parity-check constraints
provide sufficient redundancy to absorb substantial structural
and lexical perturbations, allowing the decoder to recover
the original watermark. Thus, MATRIX succeeds even under
compound attacks that target both embedding channels.
A detailed analysis is provided in our replication package.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Practicality Analysis
MATRIX is theoretically sound, but practical deployment
may face several challenges. Detection failures can occur in
rare cases where static analysis is hindered by complex or
unconventional code, though the dual-channel backup helps
mitigate this risk. Attribution ambiguity may also arise if wa-
termark patterns are insufficiently unique, potentially leading
to mistaken ownership claims.
Unit tests verify functional correctness, but cannot guarantee
full semantic preservation under all edge cases. Moreover,
a highly informed adversary might still craft strategies to
circumvent detection, despite the system’s randomized trans-
formations and parity-check encoding.
Nevertheless, these limitations are minor in typical use
cases, and MATRIX remains robust and practical for real-world
adoption.
B. Limitations
While MATRIX provides a robust and flexible solution for
code provenance, several aspects could benefit from further
exploration.
Granularity
requirement
for
detection.
Like
prior
schemes [41], [43], [44], MATRIX requires syntactically valid
code for detection, as static analysis cannot be performed
on ill-formed or incomplete code fragments. While practical

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
(a) Attack to Formal channel
(b) Attack to Natural channel
(c) Attack to Both channel
Fig. 6: Case Study: The red parts are the attacked code, and the blue shaded areas are the watermarked code.
instances show that MATRIX can be extended to embed
watermarks at the file level, detecting watermarks in arbitrary
fragments,
especially
those
lacking
syntactic
integrity,
remains
challenging
and
would
require
fundamentally
different techniques. Nevertheless, function-level or block-
level code is sufficient for most practical scenarios where
complete units of code, rather than isolated lines, are reused.
Scalability of parity-based encoding scheme. The number
of independently verifiable organizations is bounded by avail-
able transformation anchors. While our dual-channel design
expands capacity 2-6× over baselines, extremely fine-grained
multi-organization scenarios may exceed anchor limits. Nev-
ertheless, our current capacity suffices for most practical
deployments with reasonable numbers of stakeholders.
Reliance on manually curated set of code transformations.
Our semantic-preserving transformations use handcrafted rules
that ensure correctness but may not cover all coding styles.
While learning-based approaches could expand coverage, they
sacrifice interpretability and robustness to distribution shifts.
Our rule-based design prioritizes reliability and transparency,
which is critical for security applications, over exhaustive style
coverage.
VI. RELATED WORK
A. Software Watermarking
Software watermarking is a research area dedicated to em-
bedding secret signals into code to protect the owner’s copy-
right without degrading performance. This field is generally
categorized into dynamic and static watermarking approaches.
Dynamic watermarking methods [59], [60] inject water-
marks during compilation or execution. For example, by
triggering hidden control flows or specific execution states
during operation [59], [61], [62], enabling the watermark to
be extracted and verified at runtime.
Among static watermarking techniques, one approach em-
beds watermarks as part of the software by transforming
executables [63]–[65]. For instance, Kang et al. [66] encoded
watermarks by reordering binary functions, while Monden et
al. [67] inserted virtual methods carrying watermark bitstrings
into Java class files.
However, for copyright protection of LLM-generated code,
source code is usually released as plain text visible to develop-
ers. Thus, static methods based on reordering, virtual methods,
or dead code may be conspicuous, making direct watermarking
of source code text a more suitable strategy, similar to natural
language watermarking.
B. Black-box Code Watermarking
Tosyn [32] resists imitation attacks by shifting code syntax
away from the model’s training distribution through rule-
based transformations. ACW [41] uses idempotent, semantics-
preserving transformations, but its reliance on all n ≥6
rules limits robustness, while fixed identifier bits constrain

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
13
capacity and complicate recovery. More generally, these
transformation-based methods often produce isomorphic syn-
tactic patterns, making watermarks vulnerable to differential
detection, theft, and forgery.
CodeMark [42] embeds bit strings into variable names,
preserving both natural and operational semantics using a
contextual scheme with graph neural networks. SrcMarker [43]
uses a dual-channel Transformer to embed watermarks in code
structure and variable names. While preserving functionality,
its reliance on a shallow model limits detection performance
due to weak feature extraction. RoSeMary [44] integrates
code watermarking with zero-knowledge proofs to verify code
provenance without revealing the watermark. These learning-
based watermarking often face challenges in explainability,
and deployment practicality.
C. White-box Code Watermarking
SWEET [45] partitions high-entropy tokens into green
and red lists to restrict LLM sampling to “safe” tokens.
CodeIP [46] predicts the syntactic roles of tokens to determine
suitable embedding locations. STONE [48] identifies non-
syntactic tokens via entropy and introduces evaluation metrics
such as detectability and naturalness. STA-M [47] employs
soft entropy-based thresholds to steer token sampling without
hard constraints. MCGMark [49] embeds watermarks with
detection and error-correction bits, using syntax- and structure-
aware token skipping for robustness. These approaches rely
on local heuristics rather than a global understanding of code
syntax and semantics, making them prone to subtle errors
or functionality degradation. Moreover, most support only
watermark detection, rather than arbitrary message embedding,
which limits their use in advanced attribution and tracking
scenarios.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we present MATRIX, a secure watermarking
framework that balances detectability, fidelity, robustness, and
interpretability. Our method combines grouping constraints,
BCH error-correcting codes, and parity-check matrices to
improve robustness and detectability while keeping water-
mark fingerprints statistically concealed. We further employ
semantic-preserving code transformations and variable renam-
ing to maintain functional correctness, and use a dual-channel
mechanism for mutual backup to further enhance robustness.
Extensive experiments on diverse code benchmarks demon-
strate the effectiveness of MATRIX.