UNSEEN: A Cross-Stack LLM Unlearning Defense
against AR-LLM Social Engineering Attacks
Tianlong Yu1, Yang Yang1, Xiao Luo1, Lihong Liu1, Fudu Xing2,
Zui Tao3, Kailong Wang3, Gaoyang Liu3, Ting Bi3
1Hubei University, Wuhan, China
2University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA
3Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China
tommyyu21@163.com, yangyang@hubu.edu.cn, (xiaoluo, 202421121013103)@stu.hubu.edu.cn, fuduxing@usc.edu,
(tzzz1, wangkl, 2025010019)@hust.edu.cn, ting.bi@ieee.org
ABSTRACT
Emerging AR-LLM-based Social Engineering attack (e.g., SEAR)
is at the edge of posing great threats to real-world social life. In
such AR-LLM-SE attack, the attacker can leverage AR (Augmented
Reality) glass to capture the image and vocal information of the
target, using the LLM to identify the target and generate the social
profile, using the LLM agents to apply social engineering strategies
for conversation suggestion to win the target’s trust and perform
phishing afterwards. Current defensive approaches, such as role-
based access control or data flow tracking, are not directly applica-
ble to the convergent AR-LLM ecosystem (considering embedded
AR device and opaque LLM inference), leaving an emerging and
potent social engineering threat that existing privacy paradigms
are ill-equipped to address. This necessitates a shift beyond solely
human-centric measures like legislation and user education toward
enforceable vendor policies and platform-level restrictions. Real-
izing this vision, however, faces significant technical challenges:
securing resource-constrained AR-embedded devices, implement-
ing fine-grained access control within opaque LLM inferences, and
governing adaptive interactive agents. To address these challenges,
we present UNSEEN, a coordinated cross-stack defense that com-
bines an AR ACL (Access Control Layer) for identity-gated sensing,
F-RMU-based LLM unlearning for sensitive profile suppression, and
runtime agent guardrails for adaptive interaction control. We evalu-
ate UNSEEN in an IRB-approved user study with 60 participants and
a dataset of 360 annotated conversations across realistic social sce-
narios (e.g., coffee shops and networking events), using SEAR as the
attack baseline. The experiment shows that UNSEEN reduces the
Social-Engineering attack effectiveness by at least 61% for phishing
photo links, social apps, SMS, and phone calls, providing practical,
cross-stack defense against AR-LLM social-engineering attacks.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing →Human computer interac-
tion (HCI).
KEYWORDS
Augmented Reality, Multimodal LLMs, Social Engineering Attacks.
1
INTRODUCTION
The convergence of Augmented Reality (AR) and Large Language
Models (LLMs) has ushered in a new era of immersive computing [9,
24, 31, 37], yet it simultaneously enables a novel and potent form of
digital threat: the AR-LLM-based Social Engineering (AR-LLM-SE)
attack [3, 41]. In this emerging paradigm, an attacker can leverage
AR glasses to surreptitiously capture a target’s visual and vocal data,
employ an LLM to analyze this data for identity and social profiling,
and subsequently deploy LLM-driven interactive agents to craft and
suggest highly personalized, trust-building conversation strategies,
ultimately facilitating sophisticated phishing or manipulation. This
attack vector stands at the edge of posing grave threats to real-world
social interactions and personal security, moving cyber-physical
threats directly into the fabric of daily life [20].
Current defensive paradigms are fundamentally ill-suited to
this convergent threat. Traditional privacy mechanisms, including
role-based access control [15, 22, 29] and data-flow tracking [12],
are largely designed for single-layer systems, whereas AR-LLM
social engineering operates as a cross-stage pipeline. In this set-
ting, resource-constrained always-on AR devices and opaque, data-
hungry model inference create a practical security gap [3] that
cannot be closed by human-centric countermeasures alone (e.g.,
legislation or user education). The key issue is architectural mis-
match: device-side controls may limit sensor invocation but cannot
prevent downstream profile inference once data is captured; model-
side controls are difficult to enforce at identity granularity; and
output-time filtering is brittle under adaptive multi-turn prompting.
Effective mitigation must jointly constrain sensing, inference, and
interaction rather than treating them as independent surfaces.
To address this challenge, we propose UNSEEN, a coordinated
cross-stack defense with three complementary layers: (1) LLM
Unlearning for Sensitive Profile Suppression, using F-RMU
(Fisher-Weighted Sparse Representation Misalignment) to reduce
retention and inference of protected social-profile attributes; (2) AR
ACL for Identity-Gated Sensing, a reference-monitor-based layer
that enforces lightweight, fine-grained mediation on AR devices
before data is forwarded downstream; and (3) Agent Guardrails
for Adaptive Interaction Control, a runtime, state-aware control
layer that constrains adaptive multi-turn responses to block social-
engineering policy violations. Detailed workflow in Section 3.
Our main contributions are as follows: Contribution 1: First
end-to-end defense against AR-LLM-based Social Engineer-
ing attacks. We present UNSEEN - the first end-to-end defense
against AR-LLM social-engineering attacks that protects cross-layer
surface spanning AR sensing, LLM inference, and Agent interaction;
Contribution 2: A novel cross-stack defense architecture: We
design UNSEEN as an integrated stack that combines AR ACL for
identity-gated sensing, F-RMU-based LLM unlearning for sensitive
arXiv:2604.23141v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

Tianlong Yu1, Yang Yang1, Xiao Luo1, Lihong Liu1, Fudu Xing2,
Zui Tao3, Kailong Wang3, Gaoyang Liu3, Ting Bi3
Table 1: Comparison across three defense dimensions.
Approach
Vendor
Coverage
Resilience
AR ACL
AR Glass
Device sensing
Medium
LLM Unlearn
LLM Model
Model inference
Medium
Agent Guardrails
Agent
Interaction layer
Low
UNSEEN
Any
All layers
High
profile suppression, and runtime agent guardrails for adaptive in-
teraction control. Contribution 3: Prototype implementation
and IRB dataset: We implement the full pipeline and constructed
an IRB dataset with 60 participants and 360 annotated conversa-
tions, and show, through comparative and ablation evaluations,
that the proposed stack substantially reduces social-engineering
effectiveness while maintaining practical system usability.
IRB Permission: This study was approved by the IRB. All human-
related data were collected under rigorous ethical guidelines, and
anonymized prior to analysis, and handled in strict accordance with
data protection protocols. No personally identifying information
is disclosed in this study. The study adhered to all applicable legal
and ethical standards for research involving human subjects.
UNSEEN Code and Dataset available at: https://gitlab.com/yqts-
group/unseenxxx.git.
2
RELATED WORKS AND MOTIVATION
2.1
AR-LLM-based Social Engineering Attack
Recent works show how social engineering can be systematically
strengthened by combining AR sensing, LLM reasoning, and interac-
tive Agent. Classical social-engineering studies [4, 17, 28, 30] mostly
focus on human factors and persuasion strategies [5, 32, 33, 38],
while recent LLM-agent works [10] demonstrate that LLMs can
automate context-aware phishing scripts at scale. AR-assisted intel-
ligence systems [13, 16, 21, 37] show that AR sensors can continu-
ously capture visual and auditory cues from physical environments,
dramatically increasing the fidelity of personal context extraction.
SEAR [3, 41] connects these threads into an end-to-end attack
pipeline, using AR sensing for target capture, multimodal LLM
inference for identity/profile construction, and agentic dialogue
planning for adaptive trust manipulation, moving social engineer-
ing from static message crafting to real-time closed-loop interaction.
This emerging attack class motivates defenses that operate across
all three stages rather than at a single point defense.
2.2
AR ACL
Prior AR/wearable defenses emphasize permission gating, local
access control, and on-device recognition to reduce unauthorized
camera/microphone use [6, 23, 27]. Yet mobile/AR permission mod-
els remain coarse-grained (app-level allow/deny) and typically do
not enforce identity-aware capture constraints during live inter-
action [11]. At the same time, edge-efficient vision and open-set
recognition indicate that lightweight identity screening is feasible
on resource-constrained devices for real-time filtering before raw
multimodal signals are forwarded downstream [7, 14]. For AR-LLM
social-engineering threats, two gaps remain: permission-centric
controls do not address the attacker’s semantic objective (harvest-
ing personally identifying context in open physical environments),
and partial sensing constraints are insufficient when downstream
profile inference and dialogue generation remain unconstrained.
2.3
LLM Unlearn
In Multimodal LLMs, balancing computational efficiency with un-
learning efficacy is critical. Among existing schemes, methods based
on Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) [18] have become dominant due
to their ability to adapt models with minimal overhead. Several
works have adapted LoRA for unlearning tasks; for instance, Forget-
Me-Not [42] utilizes LoRA to efficiently update attention weights in
text-to-image models to remove specific concepts. Concurrently, an-
other class of approaches focuses on modifying model components
through sparse updates. Meng et al. [26] proposed MEMIT, which
locates and edits factual associations in the Feed-Forward Network
(FFN) layers of LLMs, while Task Vectors [19] demonstrated that
arithmetic operations on model weights can effectively remove task-
specific capabilities. More recently, Yoon et al. [40] advanced this
paradigm in the context of security, utilizing sparsity-constrained
optimization to achieve effective few-shot unlearning.
Despite these advancements, applying these techniques to Mul-
timodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) reveals three coupled
limitations: first, most existing approaches [26, 35, 36] rely on homo-
geneous importance metrics (e.g., gradient magnitude or activation
frequency), which are effective for discrete text tokens but fail to
capture the geometric structure of the vision encoder, where sensi-
tive concepts are distributed over a continuous feature manifold and
encoded by local curvature; second, current sparse unlearning meth-
ods often use destructive edits such as zeroing neurons or directly
modifying pre-trained parameters [35], which, as suggested by
weight-manipulation analyses in Ilharco et al. [19], can disrupt deli-
cate cross-modal feature correlations and trigger a “lobotomy-style”
degradation of alignment; third, standard unlearning objectives can
be numerically unstable in high-dimensional multimodal optimiza-
tion, so without robust constraints they may diverge, motivating
robust losses with sparsity-constrained updates[40].
2.4
Agent Guardrails
Related work increasingly shows that the conversational layer is a
primary abuse surface for LLM-powered agents [1, 8, 34, 39]. Recent
studies [1, 8, 28] demonstrate that LLM agents can be steered to gen-
erate persuasive phishing or jailbreak-enabled social-engineering
content with high contextual specificity, and SEAR [3] further in-
dicates that this risk becomes stronger when dialogue generation
is coupled with AR-based personal-context capture. In response,
guardrail-oriented defenses in practice commonly adopt runtime
policy checks, refusal templates, and constrained response rewrit-
ing to block unsafe disclosures before user delivery. However, most
existing guardrails are largely text-rule-centric and single-turn,
making them brittle against adaptive multi-turn attacks (e.g., alias-
ing, prompt reframing, or profile-based inference). These limita-
tions motivate our Agent ACL design, which treats guardrails as a
dynamic, state-aware control layer.

UNSEEN: A Cross-Stack LLM Unlearning Defense
against AR-LLM Social Engineering Attacks
Figure 1: AR-LLM Social Engineering attacks (above) and how UNSEEN can prevent it (below).
2.5
Need for Cross-Stack Defense
AR-LLM social engineering is fundamentally a pipeline attack: at-
tackers first capture context at the AR sensing layer, then infer
sensitive profiles at the model layer, and finally operationalize ma-
nipulation through adaptive agent interaction. This attack structure
creates a direct mismatch with single-layer defenses, because pro-
tection at one stage still leaves two downstream paths available
for abuse. Table 1 shows why UNSEEN is intentionally designed
as a cross-stack defense across three key dimensions. Vendor re-
quirement: each single-layer method depends on a specific vendor
(AR device, model provider, or agent platform), which limits de-
ployability in heterogeneous ecosystems; UNSEEN is deployable
when any one participating vendor can enforce part of the pipeline.
Coverage breadth: AR ACL, LLM unlearning, and agent guardrails
each protect only one stage, while UNSEEN covers device sensing,
model inference, and interaction jointly. Bypass resilience: single-
layer controls are easier to route around (e.g., rooted-device capture,
prompt adaptation, or fallback pathways), whereas coordinated con-
trols force attackers to evade multiple coupled checkpoints. There-
fore, the motivation for UNSEEN is not additive feature stacking but
risk-structure alignment: a cross-layer attack requires cross-layer
containment. By combining AR ACL, LLM unlearning, and agent
guardrails into one coordinated path, UNSEEN reduces single-point
failure and provides stronger defense than any isolated mechanism.
3
OVERVIEW
In this section, we provide the overview of UNSEEN, including the
threat model, attack stages, defense gap, and cross-stack defense
workflow and modules.
Threat model: We assume the following adversarial capabilities
and deployment conditions:
• Adversaries can use commodity AR hardware (camera and
microphone) to continuously capture multimodal signals,
including facial, vocal, and contextual cues.
• Adversaries can aggregate auxiliary social information (e.g.,
publicly available online profiles) to build target-specific
context for personalization.
• Adversaries can use LLM-based reasoning and agentic dia-
logue generation to adapt conversational strategies.
• Targets can be impacted by social-engineering factors such
as authority bias, reciprocity, and cognitive overload during
live interaction.
• Current commercial AR platforms do not consistently dis-
able identity-aware capture (e.g., face recording).
AR-LLM Social-Engineering attack stages: As shown in Fig-
ure 1, attack proceeds as a closed loop: (i) AR sensing captures mul-
timodal target signals, (ii) LLM-based inference extracts identity
and social-profile attributes, and (iii) an interactive agent generates
adaptive, trust-building dialogue for phishing or manipulation. This
coupling of physical-world sensing with model-driven persuasion
elevates social engineering from static message crafting to real-time
cyber-physical manipulation.
Why current defenses fail: Existing defenses are mostly single-
layer and therefore mismatched to this cross-layer pipeline. Device-
side permissions are often coarse-grained and app-centric, model-
side internals are opaque and difficult to constrain semantically, and
output filtering alone is brittle under adaptive multi-turn prompting.
As a result, sensitive information can still be captured upstream,
inferred midstream, and leaked downstream.
Realizing an effective defense therefore requires solving three
coupled technical challenges:
• Challenge 1: Fine-grained ACL within opaque LLM
inference. Enforcing access control within opaque genera-
tive inference is difficult, sensitive social attributes can be
implicitly inferred from benign inputs.

Tianlong Yu1, Yang Yang1, Xiao Luo1, Lihong Liu1, Fudu Xing2,
Zui Tao3, Kailong Wang3, Gaoyang Liu3, Ting Bi3
Figure 2: F-RMU framework.
• Challenge 2: Securing resource-constrained AR de-
vices. AR endpoints must provide robust capture-time sen-
sor governance under strict latency and compute constraints.
• Challenge 3: Governing adaptive interactive agents.
Runtime control of adaptive multi-turn responses is needed
to prevent policy evasion and malicious SE strategies.
To address these challenges, as shown in Figure 1, UNSEEN
adopts a coordinated three-layer defense stack: 1) LLM Unlearn-
ing for Sensitive Profile Suppression: An F-RMU-based unlearn-
ing mechanism that reduces retention and inference of protected
social-profile attributes in the model; 2) AR ACL for Identity-
Gated Sensing: A reference-monitor-based AR control layer that
performs lightweight, fine-grained mediation of sensor access be-
fore signals are released downstream; 3) Agent Guardrails for
Adaptive Interaction Control: A runtime, state-aware guardrail
layer that monitors and constrains adaptive multi-turn outputs to
block malicious social-engineering behaviors. Together, these three
layers provide complementary protection across sensing, inference,
and interaction, reducing both upstream exposure and downstream
leakage risk. We present the LLM-layer defense (LLM Unlearning)
in Section 4, and the non-LLM control layers (AR ACL and Agent
Guardrails) in Section 5.
4
LLM UNLEARN FOR PROFILE SUPPRESSION
This section presents the LLM-layer defense in UNSEEN, which
removes socially sensitive identity knowledge from multimodal
models while preserving normal assistant utility. We focus on a
targeted unlearning objective: erase attacker-useful persona cues
that enable AR-LLM social engineering, without degrading benign
recognition and generation performance. To this end, we introduce
a structured and stable unlearning pipeline that localizes sensitive
parameters and applies minimal, controlled updates.
4.1
F-RMU Framework
As show in Algorithm 1, we present the Fisher-Weighted Sparse
Representation Misalignment (F-RMU). The goal is targeted
unlearning in Large Multimodal Models (LMMs): remove attacker-
useful identity concepts while preserving general utility and safety
alignment. As shown in Figure 2, F-RMU follows two coupled stages:
(1) Heterogeneous Geometric Sensitivity Analysis to localize high-risk
parameters, and (2) Structured Sparse Adaptation to apply minimal,
Algorithm 1 Fisher-Weighted Sparse Representation Misalignment
Require: Pre-trained LMM 𝜃, Forget Set 𝐷𝑓, Retain Set 𝐷𝑟
Require: Integration steps 𝑚, Top-𝐾sparsity ratio 𝑘, Hyperpa-
rameters 𝛽,𝛾
Ensure: Safety-Aligned Unlearned Model 𝜃∗
1: Phase 1: Heterogeneous Geometric Localization
2: Initialize accumulators 𝐼𝑓𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑟←0, 𝐼𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑←0
3: for step 𝑠= 1 to 𝑚do
4:
𝛼←𝑠/𝑚, 𝜃′ ←𝛼𝜃{Interpolation on Manifold}
5:
Compute Gradients 𝐺←∇𝜃′L(𝐷𝑓;𝜃′)
6:
𝐼𝑓𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑟←𝐼𝑓𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑟+ (𝐺⊙𝐺) {Accumulate Diagonal Fisher}
7:
𝐼𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑←𝐼𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑+ |𝐺| {Accumulate Integrated Gradients}
8: end for
9: Calculate Scores: 𝑆←1
𝑚(𝐼𝑓𝑖𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑟· 𝜃2 ⊕𝐼𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑· |𝜃|)
10: Identify Attack Surface: S ←TopK(𝑆,𝑘)
11: Phase 2: Structured Sparse Setup
12: Freeze backbone 𝜃frozen ←𝜃
13: Initialize sparse residuals Δ𝑊S ←0 {Zero-Init Stability}
14: Phase 3: Robust RMU Optimization
15: Define Teacher Mtea ←Copy(𝜃)
16: while not converged do
17:
for batch (𝑥𝑓,𝑥𝑟) in (𝐷𝑓, 𝐷𝑟) do
18:
Extract features 𝐻stu(𝑥), 𝐻tea(𝑥)
19:
Obfuscation Step (Forget):
20:
𝑣𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑∼N (0, 𝐼), 𝛾←∥𝐻tea(𝑥𝑓)∥2
21:
Lforget ←Huber(𝐻stu(𝑥𝑓),𝛾· 𝑣𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑)
22:
Preservation Step (Retain):
23:
Lretain ←Huber(𝐻stu(𝑥𝑟), 𝐻tea(𝑥𝑟))
24:
Update Δ𝑊S ←Δ𝑊S −𝜂∇(Lforget + 𝛽Lretain)
25:
end for
26: end while
27: Phase 4: Lossless Merge
28: return 𝜃∗←𝜃frozen ⊕Δ𝑊S
localized updates for concept removal. Figure 2 illustrates the full
pipeline. On the left, the model receives forget samples (Identity A)
and retain samples (Identity B). In the middle, backbone parame-
ters are frozen (blue), and a parallel PartialLinear residual branch
(orange) is inserted; a Fisher-guided Top-𝐾mask activates only the
most sensitive neurons, reducing collateral parameter drift. On the
right, F-RMU outputs from frozen and residual paths are merged
into a modified representation and optimized with dual objectives:
(1) Forget Loss, which maps forget representations toward random
directions for obfuscation, and (2) Retain Loss, which distills from
the teacher model to preserve non-target capabilities.
4.2
Heterogeneous Geometric Sensitivity
To minimize collateral damage and identify the precise attack sur-
face where sensitive concepts are encoded, we argue that vision
and text parameters reside on different optimization manifolds.
Vision Tower: Integrated Fisher Information (IFI). For the vi-
sion encoder, we model parameter importance using Riemannian
geometry. We derive a path-integrated metric based on the Fisher
Information Matrix (FIM).

UNSEEN: A Cross-Stack LLM Unlearning Defense
against AR-LLM Social Engineering Attacks
Figure 3: Visualization of Neuron Importance via Fisher In-
formation. Top: Random baseline showing uniform noise.
Bottom: Our Fisher-weighted metric reveals highly struc-
tured sparse patterns (vertical bands).
To quantify the sensitivity of parameter 𝜃∈R𝑑with respect
to the forget set 𝐷𝑓, we analyze the change in loss ΔL under a
perturbation 𝛿. Using a second-order Taylor expansion around 𝜃:
ΔL(𝜃+ 𝛿) ≈L(𝜃) + ∇L(𝜃)𝑇𝛿+ 1
2𝛿𝑇𝐻(𝜃)𝛿
(1)
Assuming the model is near convergence (∇L ≈0) and approxi-
mating the Hessian 𝐻(𝜃) with the Fisher Information Matrix 𝐹(𝜃),
the loss change is dominated by the curvature term:
ΔL ≈1
2𝛿𝑇𝐹(𝜃)𝛿
(2)
The importance score 𝑆𝑖for removing the 𝑖-th parameter (𝛿𝑖= −𝜃𝑖)
is thus 𝑆𝑖≈1
2𝐹𝑖𝑖(𝜃)𝜃2
𝑖. To mitigate local fluctuations in curvature,
we extend this point estimate to a path integral along the trajectory
𝛾(𝛼) = 𝛼𝜃∗from 𝛼= 0 to 1:
I𝑅𝑖𝑒𝑚(𝜃𝑖) =
∫1
0
𝐹𝑖𝑖(𝛾(𝛼)) · (𝛾𝑖(𝛼))2 𝑑𝛼
(3)
By substituting the empirical definition of diagonal Fisher as 𝐹𝑖𝑖≈
E[(𝜕L/𝜕𝜃𝑖)2], we derive Integrated Fisher Information (IFI):
I (𝑖)
𝐼𝐹𝐼=
∫1
0
E(𝑥,𝑦)∼𝐷𝑓
" 𝜕L(𝑓(𝛼𝜃∗))
𝜕(𝛼𝜃𝑖)
2#
⊙(𝜃𝑖)2 𝑑𝛼
(4)
We approximate this integral using a Riemann sum with 𝑚steps.
This metric captures the global curvature of the loss landscape,
identifying neurons structurally critical for the forget set. Figure 3
is a heatmap comparing IFI scores vs. simple Gradient Magnitude,
which shows that IFI highlights sparse, specific regions while gra-
dients are noisy/diffuse, which justifies our partial linear design.
Text Projector: Integrated Gradients (IG). For the projection
layers, we utilize Euclidean attribution via Integrated Gradients to
measure the contribution of neurons to the sparse textual output:
𝑆(𝑖)
𝑡
= |𝑊:𝑖| ⊙
∫1
𝛼=0
|∇𝛼𝑊Ltext(𝑓(𝛼𝑊);𝑥,𝑦)| 𝑑𝛼
(5)
Based on these metrics, we generate a binary mask 𝑀(𝑙) for each
layer by selecting top-𝐾neurons with the highest scores.
Figure 4: t-SNE Visualization of Feature Manifold Transfor-
mation. The plot shows the embedding space before and after
F-RMU. The retained identity (Blue) remains invariant (over-
lapping clusters), while the target identity (Red) is exploded
into a high-entropy distribution, confirming robust privacy
obfuscation against inversion attacks.
4.3
Column-wise Sparse Residual Adaptation
Existing Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods like LoRA
assume low-rank updates (Δ𝑊= 𝐴× 𝐵). We argue that unlearning
is inherently a sparse update problem, requiring surgical modi-
fication of local circuits rather than global low-rank adjustments.
To this end, we introduce PartialLinear, a structured sparsity
mechanism. We decompose the layer computation into a frozen
backbone and a trainable sparse residual. For a selected subset of
neuron indices S (derived from the top-𝐾mask), the forward pass
is formulated as:
𝑦= 𝑥𝑊𝑇
frozen + PS(𝑥)Δ𝑊𝑇
S
(6)
where PS(·) projects the input 𝑥onto the subspace of indices S
(column slicing), and Δ𝑊S ∈R𝑑𝑜𝑢𝑡×𝐾is a trainable residual matrix
initialized to zero.
Instead of relying on empirical comparisons with specific base-
lines, we highlight the intrinsic theoretical merits of our proposed
PartialLinear mechanism in a unified view: it provides surgical
precision by updating only the columns associated with critical
neurons and thus limiting collateral damage to general knowl-
edge, ensures optimization stability because the zero initializa-
tion (Δ𝑊S = 0) makes the starting model mathematically identi-
cal to the original (𝑦init = 𝑦orig), achieves extreme efficiency by
training only a tiny fraction (e.g., Top-1%) of parameters, supports
zero-overhead inference through lossless post-training merge
(𝑊final =𝑊frozen + Δ𝑊S), and strengthens security assurance by
confining parameter changes to targeted concept circuits instead
of perturbing safety-critical regions.
4.4
Representation Misalignment Optimization
To erase the target concept, we propose Representation Misalign-
ment (RMU) objective within a teacher-student framework. Let
Mstudent be trainable model and Mteacher be the frozen reference.

Tianlong Yu1, Yang Yang1, Xiao Luo1, Lihong Liu1, Fudu Xing2,
Zui Tao3, Kailong Wang3, Gaoyang Liu3, Ting Bi3
Forget Loss: Random Manifold Mapping. For forget samples
𝑥𝑓∈𝐷𝑓, we enforce the student model to map visual features to a
random vector 𝑣rand and employ Dynamic Norm Matching:
Lforget = HuberLoss  𝐻stu(𝑥𝑓),𝛾· 𝑣rand

(7)
where 𝛾= ∥𝐻tea(𝑥𝑓)∥2 matches the magnitude of the original
features. This obfuscates the semantic direction while preserving
activation statistics, rendering the target concept indistinguishable
from random noise.
Retain Loss and General Capability. For retain samples 𝑥𝑟∈𝐷𝑟,
we use distillation to preserve general capabilities:
Lretain = HuberLoss (𝐻stu(𝑥𝑟), 𝐻tea(𝑥𝑟))
(8)
To empirically validate the efficacy of our method, we visualize
the embedding space using t-SNE, as shown in Figure 4. In the
original model, the embeddings of the sensitive concept (Identity A,
light red circles) form a tightly bound and distinct cluster. However,
following the application of F-RMU, these features (red stars) are
violently exploded and scattered into a high-entropy distribution.
From a security perspective, this thoroughly destroys the semantic
structure of the target concept, providing robust privacy obfusca-
tion that makes it computationally infeasible for malicious actors
to reconstruct the sensitive identity via model inversion attacks.
Conversely, the representations of the retained concept (Identity B)
remain remarkably stable, with the embeddings before (blue circles)
and after (blue crosses) unlearning perfectly overlapping. This vi-
sual evidence confirms that our approach achieves precise, localized
erasure and strong privacy guarantees without catastrophic for-
getting. The final objective is L = Lforget + 𝛽Lretain. We explicitly
choose Huber Loss over MSE. In high-dimensional feature spaces,
outliers are common. Huber Loss transitions to a linear penalty for
large errors, providing robustness against gradient explosion.
5
AR ACL AND AGENT GUARDRAILS
This section presents UNSEEN’s non-LLM control layers as a coor-
dinated defense for the two externally exposed stages of the AR-
LLM pipeline: input-side AR sensing and output-side Agent
interaction. AR ACL enforces front-end identity-gated sensing
on resource-constrained AR devices to reduce unauthorized data
capture at the source, while Agent Guardrails enforce release-time
policy constraints to prevent protected-identity leakage through
adaptive multi-turn dialogue. Jointly, these two layers complement
model-side unlearning protection by reducing both upstream expo-
sure and downstream disclosure risk.
5.1
AR ACL for Identity-Gated Sensing
We model AR ACL as a front-end reference monitor that performs
complete mediation before any sensed identity signal is released
to downstream LLM modules. Let 𝑥denote a detected face crop
and 𝑓(·) be the embedding encoder on device, producing 𝑧= 𝑓(𝑥).
Let the enrolled whitelist be W = {𝑤1, . . . ,𝑤𝑛}, where each 𝑤𝑖
is a protected identity template. The access decision is defined by
open-set similarity verification:
ˆ𝑖= arg max
𝑖
cos(𝑧,𝑤𝑖),
grant iff cos(𝑧,𝑤ˆ𝑖) ≥𝜏,
(9)
and deny otherwise. This formulation follows least-privilege access
control: only sufficiently confident matches to authorized identities
can pass the AR boundary.
To balance security and usability, the threshold 𝜏controls false
accept rate (FAR) and false reject rate (FRR), while deployment must
satisfy an edge-latency budget, which is a constrained objective:
min
𝜏
𝜆FAR(𝜏) + (1 −𝜆) FRR(𝜏)
s.t.
𝐿≤𝐿max,
(10)
where 𝐿is end-to-end on-device inference latency. This provides
the theoretical basis for our design choice: lightweight open-set
verification on AR hardware as the first containment layer.
In our AR ACL realization, faces are first detected and cropped
using MediaPipe’s BlazeFace-based detector [2, 25], followed by a
simple 2D alignment step. The aligned face patch is then encoded
by the InsightFace buffalosc recognition model, which adopts an
MBF/MobileFaceNet backbone from the official model zoo for effi-
cient face-embedding extraction on resource-constrained devices
[7]. The AR ACL mechanism is implemented on Rayneo X3 Pro
glasses.
5.2
Agent Guardrails for Interaction Control
Agent ACL serves as UNSEEN’s release-time enforcement layer. In
AR-LLM social-engineering attacks, risk does not end at sensing
or model inference; it is operationalized at the interaction end-
point, where the agent produces personalized, persuasive language.
Thus, even after AR ACL reduces upstream exposure and LLM
unlearning suppresses sensitive internal representations, adaptive
prompting and multi-turn context can still recover residual identity
cues. Agent ACL addresses this final exposure point by applying
policy checks directly to user-visible outputs before release. This
design completes UNSEEN’s cross-stack defense logic: AR ACL
constrains what enters the pipeline, LLM unlearning constrains
what can be inferred, and Agent ACL constrains what can be dis-
closed. The release-time layer is therefore indispensable against
practical bypass strategies such as aliasing, contextual inference,
and conversational steering.
Context-based dynamic policy enforcement: We formalize agent
guardrails as a dynamic release controller over dialogue turns. At
turn 𝑡, the system state is
𝑠𝑡= (ℎ𝑡,𝑟𝑡,𝑐𝑡),
(11)
where ℎ𝑡is dialogue history, 𝑟𝑡∈[0, 1] is current privacy risk, and
𝑐𝑡is consent/protection context. For candidate output 𝑦𝑡, let Φ(𝑦𝑡)
extract person entities and let 𝑝: E →{0, 1} denote protection
labels, the release policy is
R(𝑦𝑡,𝑠𝑡) =


msg𝑠𝑎𝑓𝑒,
∃𝑒∈Φ(𝑦𝑡), 𝑝(𝑒) = 1,
sanitize(𝑦𝑡),
𝑟𝑡> 𝜏𝑡,
𝑦𝑡,
otherwise,
(12)
with adaptive dynamics
𝑟𝑡+1 = 𝑓(𝑟𝑡,𝑦𝑡,𝑜𝑡),
𝜏𝑡+1 = 𝑔(𝜏𝑡, ℓ𝑡),
(13)
where 𝑜𝑡is runtime observation (e.g., trigger events) and ℓ𝑡is online
error feedback. The corresponding safety invariant is
∀𝑡, ∀𝑒∈Φ(R(𝑦𝑡,𝑠𝑡)), 𝑝(𝑒) = 0,
(14)
which guarantees that protected identities are excluded.

UNSEEN: A Cross-Stack LLM Unlearning Defense
against AR-LLM Social Engineering Attacks
From Name Matching to Profile-Similarity ACL: A strict name-
matching ACL is bypassable via aliases, misspellings, transliteration
variants, or indirect references (e.g., role + affiliation). To improve
robustness, we extend policy triggers from name equality to profile
similarity. For each protected entity 𝑒, we maintain a profile rep-
resentation 𝑧𝑒(multimodal identity features + textual attributes).
From current context and candidate output, we construct query
profile 𝑞𝑡and compute
sim(𝑞𝑡,𝑒) = 𝛼cos

𝑞(𝑣)
𝑡
,𝑧(𝑣)
𝑒

+ (1 −𝛼) cos

𝑞(𝑡)
𝑡,𝑧(𝑡)
𝑒

,
(15)
where visual and textual channels are jointly weighted. A protected
match is triggered when
∃𝑒∈P : sim(𝑞𝑡,𝑒) > 𝛿𝑡,
(16)
with adaptive threshold𝛿𝑡calibrated from false-positive/false-negative
feedback. This makes ACL resilient to lexical obfuscation while
remaining compatible with existing guardrail actions.
6
DATASET AND METHODOLOGY
This section describes how we construct the dataset and evaluation
protocol for measuring social-engineering risk and defense effec-
tiveness in AR-LLM interactions, which is also in consistent with
SOTA AR-LLM-SE attack setting [3, 41].
6.1
Interaction Scenarios and Data Collection
Scenario Setup. We conduct real-world interactions in social set-
tings (e.g., coffee shops and networking events) with 60 participants
and 360 total conversations. Participants rotate roles across trials
(target vs. attacker) to balance subject-specific bias. Each participant
experiences six conditions: (1) Basic conversation (no technologi-
cal assistance); (2) SEAR (AR + multimodal LLM + social agent); (3)
UNSEEN (full stack); (4) UNSEEN (AR ACL only); (5) UNSEEN
(LLM Unlearn only); (6) UNSEEN (Agent Guardrail only). This
design enables both end-to-end comparison (SEAR vs. UNSEEN)
and causal attribution of each defense layer through ablation.
Dataset Composition. The dataset contains four components:
(1) AR Multimodal Data: visual, audio, and environment context
captured by AR glasses (e.g., facial/body cues, speech transcripts,
time/location/object context); (2) Open Social Data: publicly avail-
able participant-related text/image/video signals used by the attack
pipeline; (3) Post-Interaction Survey Data: structured subjective
and behavioral responses; (4) UNSEEN-Protected Outputs: model
outputs and interaction traces after applying full UNSEEN and each
single-layer ablation, which provides evidence of how cross-stack
defense changes generated social profiles and dialogue behaviors.
6.2
Survey Questionnaire Design
Post-Interaction Survey. All questions use a 5-point Likert scale
(1 = Strongly Disagree, 5 = Strongly Agree), unless otherwise noted.
The survey is organized into three parts: (A) Condition-Level Expe-
rience (including UNSEEN ablation): Participants rate conversation
experience in each condition: (1) Basic conversation; (2) SEAR; (3)
UNSEEN (full stack); (4) UNSEEN (AR ACL only); (5) UNSEEN (LLM
Unlearn only); (6) UNSEEN (Agent Guardrail only). This part quan-
tifies the usability-security tradeoff of cross-stack defense and each
component; (B) Subjective Interaction Quality: We collect perception
metrics including relevance, appropriateness, naturalness, pacing,
sincerity, emotional progression, AR comfort, willingness without
AR, future interaction intent, perceived conversational depth, and
acceptance of future system use; (C) Social-Engineering Susceptibil-
ity: We measure behavioral intent after each interaction: (1) clicking
shared photo links, (2) adding the person on social apps, (3) clicking
SMS links, (4) answering phone calls, (5) trust before interaction, (6)
trust after interaction. These items serve as direct proxies for attack
success probability and are the primary downstream indicators for
UNSEEN effectiveness.
Participant Demographics. The cohort includes 60 participants
aged 23–62 (average age 34), with near-balanced gender distribution
(28 male, 32 female) and a variaty of professions. This demographic
spread supports evaluating UNSEEN under heterogeneous social
interaction styles. More details are avaliable in UNSEEN dataset.
7
EXPERIMENTS
7.1
Effectiveness against AR-LLM-SE Attacks
Table 2 shows that UNSEEN substantially reduces SEAR’s social-
engineering effectiveness across all four attack channels (Photo
Link, Social App, SMS, and Phone Call). Under SEAR, high suscepti-
bility responses (“Very Likely” + “Likely”) dominate: 93.3% for Photo
Link, 93.3% for Social App, 91.7% for SMS, and 85.0% for Phone Call.
In contrast, under UNSEEN, the same actions shift entirely to low-
susceptibility responses (“Unlikely” + “Very Unlikely”), with 0.0%
in “Very Likely”/“Likely” across all four metrics. This distributional
shift is also reflected in the expected score. The mean score drops
from 4.30 to 1.67 for Photo Link, from 4.37 to 1.63 for Social App,
from 4.32 to 1.68 for SMS, and from 4.18 to 1.62 for Phone Call.
These correspond to relative reductions of approximately 61.2%,
62.7%, 61.1%, and 61.2%, respectively. Overall, UNSEEN consistently
pushes participant responses from likely compliance to likely re-
jection. These results indicate that UNSEEN effectively mitigates
SEAR’s practical attack success by reducing both the central ten-
dency and the high-risk response mass in each communication
channel. The findings support UNSEEN as an effective defensive
mechanism against AR-LLM-based Social-Engineering attacks.
7.2
UNSEEN Latency Metrics
Table 3 reports Min, Max, P90, and Average latency for SEAR and
UNSEEN across 60 conversations. We use P90 to characterize tail
latency, i.e., the value below which 90% of observations fall. For
SEAR, AR is lightweight (80.6 ms average; 92.4 ms P90), Social
Agent introduces moderate per-stage delay (2.8 s average; 4.0 s P90),
and the Multimodal LLM dominates latency (43.3 s average; 52.7 s
P90) due to profile generation. For non-LLM protection, UNSEEN
adds explicit protection costs at the AR and agent stages: AR ACL
averages 612.1 ms (420.8 ms P90), and Agent Guardrail averages
12.5 s (21.7 s P90). However, a counter-intuitive but important
result is that UNSEEN’s LLM Unlearn module (22.3 s average) is
substantially faster than SEAR’s Multimodal LLM module (43.3
s average). This comes from architectural differences: UNSEEN
uses a more direct model-internal profile generation path, whereas
SEAR depends on slower retrieval-heavy profile construction (e.g.,
RAG-style lookup) [3]. When aggregated across the three modules,
SEAR’s average pipeline latency is about 46.2 s, while UNSEEN’s

Tianlong Yu1, Yang Yang1, Xiao Luo1, Lihong Liu1, Fudu Xing2,
Zui Tao3, Kailong Wang3, Gaoyang Liu3, Ting Bi3
Table 2: Social-engineering effectiveness score distribution comparison between SEAR and UNSEEN.
SEAR
UNSEEN
Metric
5pt(%)
4pt(%)
3pt(%)
2pt(%)
1pt(%)
E[Score]
𝜎(Score)
5pt(%)
4pt(%)
3pt(%)
2pt(%)
1pt(%)
E[Score]
𝜎(Score)
Photo Link
40.0
53.3
3.3
3.3
0.0
4.30
0.69
0.0
0.0
0.0
66.7
33.3
1.67
0.47
Social App
43.3
50.0
6.7
0.0
0.0
4.37
0.61
0.0
0.0
0.0
63.3
36.7
1.63
0.48
SMS
45.0
46.7
3.3
5.0
0.0
4.32
0.76
0.0
0.0
0.0
68.3
31.7
1.68
0.47
Phone Call
35.0
50.0
13.3
1.7
0.0
4.18
0.72
0.0
0.0
0.0
61.7
38.3
1.62
0.49
Score mapping: Very Likely = 5 pt; Likely = 4 pt; Neutral = 3 pt; Unlikely = 2 pt; Very Unlikely = 1 pt.
Table 3: Latency comparison between SEAR and UNSEEN.
Approach
Component
Min
Max
P90
Average
SEAR
AR
64.5ms
95.1ms
92.4ms
80.6ms
Multimodal LLM
30.2 s
54.9 s
52.7 s
43.3 s
Social Agent
1.0 s
10.6 s
4.0 s
2.8 s
UNSEEN
AR ACL
312.7ms
741.3ms
420.8ms
612.1ms
LLM Unlearn
19.0 s
32.4 s
24.4 s
22.3 s
Agent Guardrail
6.4 s
22.6 s
21.7 s
12.5 s
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Score
UNSEEN
Agent
Guardrail
LLM
 Unlearn
AR ACL
SEAR
1.12 ± 0.32
1.60 ± 0.49
1.70 ± 0.56
2.22 ± 0.97
4.73 ± 0.51
Figure 5: UNSEEN ablation study via average social experi-
ence score (bar) and standard deviation(errorbar).
is about 45.4 s, yielding a net reduction of approximately 1.7%.
Overall, these results show that stronger security in UNSEEN does
not necessarily require higher end-to-end latency.
7.3
UNSEEN Ablastion Study
Figure 5 presents the ablation study of UNSEEN by progressively
removing key defense modules and comparing average social expe-
rience score (bar) and standard deviation(errorbar). The evaluated
settings are: UNSEEN (all modules enabled), Agent Guardrail re-
moved, LLM Unlearn removed, AR ACL removed, and SEAR (no UN-
SEEN defense). Scores are computed from the baseline-comparison
questions in Section 6, where lower scores indicate lower social-
engineering success. The results show a clear monotonic trend: as
defensive components are removed, SEAR’s effectiveness recovers.
UNSEEN achieves the lowest mean score at 1.12 (±0.32). Remov-
ing Agent Guardrail increases the score to 1.60 (±0.49), removing
LLM Unlearn further increases it to 1.70 (±0.56), and removing
AR ACL causes the largest degradation among ablations, reaching
2.22 (±0.97). Without UNSEEN defenses (SEAR), the mean score
rises to 4.73 (±0.51). Compared with SEAR, full UNSEEN reduces
Figure 6: Comparison of subjective-experiences.
the average effectiveness score by 76.3%. The ablation gaps also
quantify each module’s contribution: +0.48 after removing Agent
Guardrail, +0.58 after removing LLM Unlearn, and +1.10 after re-
moving AR ACL (all relative to full UNSEEN). Overall, the ablation
study confirms that UNSEEN’s defense capability is not produced
by a single component; it emerges from the coordinated design of
access control, profile-level unlearning, and agent-level guardrails.
7.4
UNSEEN Subjective Experiences Impact
Figure 6 compares SEAR and UNSEEN across 11 subjective-experience
dimensions. The trend is consistent: UNSEEN shifts all dimen-
sions from high-risk, high-engagement interaction (SEAR) to low-
engagement, low-persuasion interaction, indicating effective dis-
ruption of social-engineering dynamics. Quantitatively, the mean
score drops from 4.45 (SEAR average over 11 dimensions) to 1.98
(UNSEEN average), a 55.5% reduction. The largest decreases ap-
pear in dimensions that are directly tied to trust manipulation and
rapport formation: ARComfort (4.67 →1.70, -63.6%), Relevance
(4.52 →1.73, -61.7%), Naturalness (4.52 →2.15, -52.4%), Pacing
(4.52 →2.12, -53.1%), Sincerity (4.48 →2.23, -50.2%), Depth (4.47 →
1.58, -64.7%), and FutureIntent (4.35 →1.75, -59.8%). These reduc-
tions show that UNSEEN not only lowers immediate willingness
to cooperate, but also weakens the attacker’s ability to sustain
believable, emotionally calibrated, multi-turn influence. In other
words, the defense suppresses the core mechanisms that make SEAR

UNSEEN: A Cross-Stack LLM Unlearning Defense
against AR-LLM Social Engineering Attacks
effective: contextual relevance, conversational fluency, perceived
sincerity, and long-term re-engagement. From a security perspec-
tive, this subjective-experience degradation is desirable for defense.
SEAR relies on making interactions feel natural, comfortable, and
trustworthy to increase compliance; UNSEEN systematically breaks
this effect. Combined with the objective attack-channel results in
Table 2, the subjective findings provide converging evidence that
UNSEEN effectively defends against AR-LLM-SE attacks.
8
CONCLUSION
This work presents UNSEEN, a coordinated cross-stack defense
for AR-LLM-SE risks. UNSEEN combines identity-gated sensing
at the AR layer, targeted profile suppression at the model layer,
and release-time guardrails at the interaction layer. Our evaluation
shows that UNSEEN consistently shifts user responses from likely
compliance to likely rejection against AR-LLM-SE attacks. We hope
UNSEEN provides a practical foundation for secure AR-LLM system
design, platform policy, and real-world safety evaluation.