SPRING 2026, April 21–22, 2026, Heidelberg, Germany
On the Challenges of Holistic Intrusion Detection in ICS
Stefan Lenz1, Julia Raab1, Benedikt Holzbach1, Deniz K¨oller1, Sotiris Michaelides1, Martin Henze1,2
1Security and Privacy in Industrial Cooperation, RWTH Aachen University • 2Cyber Analysis
& Defense, Fraunhofer FKIE • {lenz, michaelides, henze}@spice.rwth-aachen.de,
{julia.raab, benedikt.holzbach, deniz.koeller}@rwth-aachen.de
Abstract. Past attacks against industrial control systems
(ICS) show that adversaries often target both the ICS net-
work and the physical process to achieve potential catas-
trophic impact. To secure ICS, intrusion detection systems
promise timely uncovering of such adversaries. However,
as these detection mechanisms typically focus on isolated
characteristics of ICS (e.g., packet timings), multiple detec-
tion systems have to be deployed in parallel, complicating
their operation in practice. In this work, to spur discussion
and further research, we present challenges encountered
during our research towards a holistic intrusion detection
system aiming to cover all dimensions of an ICS.
1
Holistic Intrusion Detection in ICS
By connecting industrial control systems (ICS) to the In-
ternet, these safety critical systems are exposed to sophis-
ticated attackers [3, 6, 7]. As ICS consist of low-resource
legacy devices that are difficult to replace and not capable
of complex security operations, retro-fitting attack detec-
tion into ICS has been a major focus of recent research [8,
19]. Since the behavior of ICS is tightly coupled with a
deterministic physical process, typical industrial intrusion
detection systems (IIDS) model benign behavior (e.g., packet
timings [10] or process states [17]) to later identify anoma-
lies. However, as attacks materialize in the network and
the physical dimension of ICS, comprehensive detection
must cover all aspects of ICS [20]. Thus, we argue that
IIDS should aim for a holistic detection approach, covering
multiple dimensions simultaneously as depicted in Fig. 1.
One method to achieve holistic detection is to use mul-
tiple one-dimensional detectors in parallel [20]. Although
such ensembles promise great detection performance in the-
ory, they are difficult to deploy, since each detector requires
sufficient training data as well parameter optimization. Fur-
thermore, individual detectors risk to miss interplay be-
tween different dimensions and it is unclear how to combine
alerts of individual detectors in a sensible manner [20].
To overcome these challenges, we set out to address the
need for a practical holistic detection method. Instead of
combining different detectors specializing in individual as-
pects, we strive to cover the complete benign behavior of
an ICS in one holistic model. During this pursuit, we en-
countered several challenges while exploring different ap-
proaches. In this paper, we discuss these challenges regard-
Process
 State
Network 
Traffic
Industrial
Control
System
Holistic
IIDS
IIDS1
IIDS2
Figure 1: Holistic industrial intrusion detection systems
(IIDS) aim to monitor both network behavior and physical
process state, while traditional IIDS focus on one.
ing process state discretization (§2), IIDS parameterization
(§3), and collecting sufficiently good training data (§4).
2
Challenge 1: Discretization
To create a holistic IIDS capturing the complete ICS in a
single model, we explored the use of process mining, which
has shown promising results in modeling physical process
state [2, 12] as well as network traffic [15]. Indeed, initial
experiments showed that such a detector can detect attacks
targeting both these dimensions, while performing on par
with other IIDSs that capture only one dimension. How-
ever, as process mining relies on discrete labels (e.g., bins)
to incorporate the physical state into the model, the funda-
mental challenge of discretization arises to assign such labels
to continuous ICS data (e.g., temperatures or fill levels).
Although many discretization mechanisms, such as sta-
tistical methods or unsupervised learning approaches (e.g.,
clustering), solve this problem, the quality of the resulting
labels/clusters is highly dependent on the distribution of
the underlying data [1, 4, 16]. To choose the optimal dis-
cretization method for an IIDS using process mining, we
compared multiple discretization methods based on their
resulting detection performance as summarized in Tb. 1. Our
experiments show that, even while utilizing benchmarking
datasets (with posterior knowledge that is not achievable
in any practical scenario), this task is not trivial, as the
best discretization method (green in Tb. 1) depends on the
considered performance metric.
Take Away
While discretization mechanisms promise well-
defined labels for process data, in the context of in-
trusion detection, identifying the “best” approach
depends on the considered detection metric.
arXiv:2604.21626v1 [cs.CR] 23 Apr 2026

Metric
Name
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F0.1
F1
eTaP
eTaR
eTaF0.1
eTaF1
Jenkspy
0.68 0.23 0.15 0.23 0.21 0.23 0.52 0.24 0.32
kMeans
0.68 0.24 0.16 0.23 0.21 0.24 0.52 0.24 0.32
Quantiles 0.77 0.71 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.69 0.14 0.66 0.23
Ground Truth
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Process 4
Process 5
Process 6
Complete
Elapsed Time [h]
0.0
12.4
24.8
49.6
62.0
74.4
86.8
99.2
111.6
37.2
124.0
Inter-Arrival Times
Medium
L1 [ms]
L2 [ms]
L3 [ms]
Wired
46.06 (0.37)
46.06 (0.37)
100.00 (0.02)
Wireless+
46.06 (0.37)
46.06 (0.37)
100 (0.12)
Wireless−
45.97 (1.47)
45.97 (1.56)
100 (0.67)
Table 1: The best algorithm (green)
to discretize process data not only de-
pends on data distribution but also on
the detection performance metric.
Figure 2: Alerts (black) of LLM detec-
tion on SWaT (red) are sensitive to pro-
cess data variance. Monitoring subpro-
cesses reduces processing overhead.
Table 2: Differences in inter-arrival
times in wired and good (+) / bad (−)
wireless channels show the need for de-
tection to adapt to dynamic behavior.
3
Challenge 2: Parameterization
A holistic IIDS, e.g., based on process mining, requires mul-
tiple additional parameters (e.g., length of the ICS cycle
in packets) that must be set manually, resulting in a need
for hard-to-come-by expert knowledge. To address the re-
sulting challenge of parameterization, we explored different
“closed-box” modeling approaches (e.g., based on LLMs),
which promise no parameterization at all. The goal of such
approaches is to gain “adequate” detection performance
while utilizing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. Exem-
plary experiments on the SWaT [5] dataset (cf. Fig. 2) in-
dicate that an LLM-based IIDS struggles to monitor the
complete process in a holistic manner, due to excessive
resource demands, even exceeded the capabilities of the
high-performance cluster node (96GB VRAM) we utilized.
Therefore, we focused on individual subprocesses in fur-
ther experiments. While the smaller scope reduces compu-
tational complexity, the detector provided nearly-constant
alerts, rendering attacks unrecognizable (except for Process
5 which has comparatively low variance). Still, due to its
closed-box nature, it is impossible to comprehend the de-
tector’s reasoning behind alerts [14], making discerning
between true and false alarm challenging. Together with
the high resource demands, these issue prevent a practical
application of a parameterless approach as a holistic IIDS.
Take Away
Although addressing the challenge of parameteri-
zation, monolithic closed-box detectors face chal-
lenges in deployment, resource usage, and inter-
pretability, preventing their use for holistic IIDS.
4
Challenge 3: Good Training Data
To meet increasing demands for flexibility and efficiency,
ICS adopt new technologies such as wireless communica-
tion [11]. These more dynamic systems exaggerate the chal-
lenge of gathering good training data in IIDS research [18].
To investigate this issue, we built an ICS simulation en-
abling us to change the communication medium without
altering the process behavior [9]. There, we analyze a popu-
lar timing-based IIDS [10], which uses deterministic inter-
arrival timings (i.e., the time between two packets) to dis-
cern between benign and anomalous behavior for three
communication scenarios: Wired (as a baseline), Wireless+
(a wireless channel in perfect condition), and Wireless−(a
wireless channel experiencing substantial disturbance).
Tb. 2 shows the mean (µ) inter-arrival times and standard
deviation (σ) for three links from our simulated ICS. First,
these results show that a wireless channel in perfect condi-
tions can achieve the same link quality as the wired medium,
although the variance in some links may be higher (Tb. 2 L3).
The wireless medium under disturbance, however, cannot
provide such link quality. Although the mean inter-arrival
time is similar or even lower than in the other scenarios, σ
is substantially higher for all links. This behavioral change
can trigger false alerts in timing-based IIDS, which cannot
distinguish a distressed channel from an attack.
As the quality of a wireless channel can change anytime
(e.g, due to noise), the model of the IIDS might not reflect
the actual (communication) behavior of the ICS, thus either
resulting in false alarms or missed attacks. Additionally, cur-
rent research [13] also suggests that ICS behavior might not
be as deterministic as often assumed. Thus, IIDS research
should also focus on mechanisms that can cope with these
dynamic environments, especially for holistic IIDS.
Take Away
Even though the collection of suitable training
data is a known challenge for intrusion detection,
modern, e.g., wireless, ICS with more dynamic
behavior further complicate this challenge.
5
Conclusion
To secure ICS against multi-faceted threats targeting both
physical process and communication, we pursue a holis-
tic detection approach which covers both dimensions of
an ICS simultaneously. In this paper, we report on our re-
search process and discuss challenges—regarding process
state discretization (§2), parameterization (§3), and training
data (§4)– we faced to push such a holistic IIDS towards
practical viability. Ultimately, our findings identify ample
research opportunities, especially highlighting opportuni-
ties in more “dynamic” detection mechanisms capable of
handling characteristics of future ICS.