Train in Vain: Functionality-Preserving Poisoning to Prevent Unauthorized
Use of Code Datasets
Yuan Xiao1*
Jiaming Wang1*
Yuchen Chen1*
Wei Song2
Jun Sun3
Shiqing Ma4
Yanzhou Mu1
Juan Zhai4
Chunrong Fang1†
Jin Song Dong5
Zhenyu Chen1†
1Nanjing University
2University of New South Wales
3Singapore Management University
4University of Massachusetts Amherst
5National University of Singapore
yuan.xiao@smail.nju.edu.cn, 231220072@smail.nju.edu.cn, yuc.chen@smail.nju.edu.cn
wei.song1@unsw.edu.au, junsun@smu.edu.sg, shiqingma@umass.edu
602022320006@smail.nju.edu.cn, juanzhai@umass.edu, fangchunrong@nju.edu.cn
dcsdjs@nus.edu.sg, zychen@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
The widespread availability of large-scale code
datasets has accelerated the development of
code large language models (CodeLLMs), rais-
ing concerns about unauthorized dataset usage.
Dataset poisoning offers a proactive defense by
reducing the utility of such unauthorized train-
ing. However, existing poisoning methods of-
ten require full-dataset poisoning and introduce
transformations that break code compilability.
In this paper, we introduce FUNPOISON, a
functionality-preserving poisoning approach
that injects short, compilable weak-use frag-
ments into executed code paths. FUNPOISON
leverages reusable statement-level templates
with automatic repair and conservative safety
checking to ensure side-effect freedom, while
a type-aware synthesis module preserves type
correctness, suppresses static-analysis warn-
ings, and improves stealth. Extensive exper-
iments across multiple CodeLLMs and code-
generation benchmarks show that FUNPOISON
achieves effective poisoning by contaminating
only 10% of the dataset, while maintaining
100% compilability and functional correctness.
FUNPOISON also remains robust against ad-
vanced code sanitization techniques, includ-
ing detection, purification, rewriting, static-
analysis, and formatting defenses.
*Equal contribution. Yuan Xiao led the overall project,
defined the research problem, technical direction, and experi-
mental agenda, carried out the key final implementation and
method convergence, and took primary responsibility for paper
writing, revision, and submission; Jiaming Wang contributed
to early-stage exploration, implementation, evaluation runs,
and dynamic analysis under Yuan Xiao’s guidance; Yuchen
Chen contributed substantially to experiment construction, ro-
bustness experiments, paper revision, and most rebuttal-stage
experiments.
†Corresponding authors.
1
Introduction
Code large language models (CodeLLMs) (GitHub,
2022; Beijing Guixin Technology, 2022; Amazon
Web Services, 2023) have achieved strong perfor-
mance across a wide range of code understanding
and generation tasks. This progress is enabled by
the availability of large-scale public code datasets,
such as CodeSearchNet (Husain et al., 2019) and
Stack v2 (BigCode Project, 2024), which aggregate
millions of code snippets and are used to pretrain
and fine-tune mainstream CodeLLMs (Nijkamp
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Rozière et al., 2023).
However, the widespread use of large-scale code
datasets in training pipelines raises compliance and
copyright concerns, as many code contributors nei-
ther expect nor consent to their code being used
for model training and fine-tuning (News, 2022;
Legal.io, 2024). Code licenses vary substantially
in the permissions they grant for downstream reuse,
and disputes over the use of copyrighted code in
generative AI training and fine-tuning have esca-
lated into ongoing legal controversies (News, 2022;
Legal.io, 2024; Firm, 2024). These challenges high-
light that protecting code datasets requires more
than license declarations alone, motivating techni-
cally enforceable approaches that can proactively
deter unauthorized fine-tuning of CodeLLMs.
Dataset poisoning (Sun et al., 2022) has emerged
as a proactive protection mechanism for safeguard-
ing code datasets against unauthorized training
(Sun et al., 2022). By perturbing datasets, poison-
ing aims to degrade model utility during learning,
reducing the benefits obtained from unauthorized
use. This deterrence-oriented property makes poi-
soning particularly appealing, as it does not rely on
post hoc attribution like code watermarking (Sun
et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026)
arXiv:2604.22291v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

Compil-
ability
Execu-
tability
0
20
40
60
80
100
Compilability/Executability
CodeBLEU
Exact
Match
0
20
40
60
80
100
CR
FunPoison
CC
CS
CodeBLEU/Exact Match
BLEU
Exact
Match
0
20
40
60
80
100
BLEU/Exact Match
FunPoison
CSR
Figure 1: Quality evaluation of FUNPOISON and Co-
Protector on fully poisoned (100%) test datasets (984
inputs, obtained via six-fold duplication of the Java sub-
set of HumanEval-X with 164 tasks). Left: code quality;
Right: comment quality.
or legal enforcement (News, 2022; Legal.io, 2024;
Firm, 2024), which are often costly, delayed, or
ineffective.
CoProtector (Sun et al., 2022) is the first, and
to date the only untargeted poisoning framework
for code datasets. It aims to deter unauthorized
use by degrading overall model performance. Co-
Protector applies four transformations: code cor-
ruption (CC), injecting syntactically invalid code;
code splicing (CS), inserting code fragments from
other programs; code renaming (CR), obfuscating
identifiers; and comment semantic reversal (CSR),
altering comment semantics without modifying ex-
ecutable code. However, CoProtector suffers from
fundamental limitations that undermine its practi-
cality. Its transformations are either functionally
destructive (CC, CS, CR), leading to near-zero com-
pilability, or semantically shallow (CSR), degrad-
ing the comment quality (Fig.1). Figure 1 compares
intrinsic quality preservation under fully poisoned
samples; the partial-poisoning effectiveness com-
parison is reported in RQ1. As shown in Fig. 2,
CoProtector achieves deterrence only in the ex-
treme case of full-dataset poisoning; under partial
poisoning, fine-tuned models still obtain clear per-
formance gains over the base model. Together, the
degradation of code quality and reliance on unre-
alistic poisoning assumptions fundamentally limit
the practicality of existing approaches, highlight-
ing the lack of functionality-preserving poisoning
methods for code datasets.
In this paper, we introduce FUNPOISON, a
functionality-preserving poisoning framework that
deters unauthorized fine-tuning of Code LLMs
without sacrificing code usability (Fig. 3). FUN-
POISON achieves this by injecting short, execution-
inert code fragments into executed paths. It con-
structs a reusable template pool from real-world
statement-level code, repairs fragments for indepen-
dent compilability, and applies conservative safety
filtering to eliminate side-effect-prone snippets.
During deployment, templates are injected only
at effect-free sites and augmented with type-aware
weak-use statements to prevent removal by static
analysis. Together, these designs enforce compil-
ability, functionality preservation, and practical
persistence, which are essential for effective poi-
soning under realistic partial-dataset settings, as
illustrated by the end-to-end pipeline in Figure 2.
Consistent with this design, experiments show that
FUNPOISON achieves strong poisoning with only a
10% injection ratio, suppressing fine-tuning gains
while maintaining 100% compilation success with
negligible runtime overhead. Additional mecha-
nism and ablation studies show that degradation is
driven by execution-path supervision rather than
superficial template exposure. FUNPOISON also
remains effective under the evaluated static analy-
sis, removal, rewriting, formatting, and adaptive-
detection settings.
In summary, we make three major contributions:
• We propose FUNPOISON, a poisoning-based pro-
tection framework for code datasets that deters
unauthorized fine-tuning while preserving nor-
mal code usability.
• FUNPOISON
introduces
a
functionality-
preserving poisoning mechanism that injects
weak-use code fragments into executed paths, en-
suring training-time influence while preserving
program semantics, compilability, and runtime
behavior.
• We provide a mechanism analysis and a con-
trolled DeadBranchInsertion ablation showing
that execution-path supervision, rather than tem-
plate exposure alone, explains the degradation
effect.
• Experiments
across
model
scales,
code-
generation benchmarks, and adaptive defenses
show that FUNPOISON is effective under partial
poisoning (10%) while maintaining 100%
compilability and functional correctness. Our
code: (Xiao et al., 2026).
2
Threat Model
Dataset poisoning is a proactive defense against
unauthorized training or fine-tuning of CodeLLMs
on protected datasets (Sun et al., 2022). We con-
sider a dataset owner who releases usable code
artifacts for ordinary development use, but does
not authorize large-scale model adaptation. The
attacker collects the released data and fine-tunes a

Codebase Poisoning
Compilable
Injection
Code LLM
Fine-tuning
Behavior
preserved
Restricted 
Trained Code
Coprotector Poisoned
Dataset
Restricted 
Trained Code
FunPoison
Poisoned
Dataset
Poisoned
Code LLMs
Functionality-
Breaking 
Poisoned Dataset
Break Code
Functionality!
Functionality
Intact
Functionality-
Preserving 
Poisoned Dataset
Poisoned
Code LLMs
Partial Poisoning 
→Protection Active
Partial Poisoning 
→ Protection Lost
Unauthorized 
Fine-tuning
Protection
Results
Preserve Code
Compilability
Break Code
Compilability
Survives
Preprocessing
Filtered Out by
Preprocessing & Sanitization
Survives Preprocessing
& Sanitization
Unauthorized 
Fine-tuning
Figure 2: End-to-end comparison of poisoning pipeline of CoProtector and FUNPOISON.
Raw Code
Poisoned Code
(a) Code Template Generation
(b) Controlled Injection
Statement
Extraction
Compilation
Repair
Variable extraction
and anonymize
Template 
Pool
Safety 
Filtering
Weak-use
Synthesis
Template
Sampling
Execution-safe
Injection
Figure 3: Overview of FUNPOISON.
pretrained CodeLLM to obtain downstream perfor-
mance gains without authorization.
The attacker controls the training pipeline, in-
cluding model choice, optimization, data prepro-
cessing, formatting, static analysis, purification,
and LLM-based rewriting. The attacker may also
know that FUNPOISON is used and may build sig-
nature rules or supervised detectors. However, the
attacker does not have access to the clean version
reserved for authorized training users, cannot man-
ually inspect web-scale data, and must preserve
benign code while maintaining an acceptable false-
positive rate.
A poisoning defense is effective when unautho-
rized fine-tuning fails to yield meaningful gains
over the base model. Benign users can still com-
pile, run, test, and integrate the released code
because FUNPOISON preserves observable pro-
gram behavior. Authorized training users can be
given clean data through licensing, access control,
or provenance-verified releases; such governance
mechanisms are complementary to the technical
defense.
3
Methodology
FUNPOISON is a functionality-preserving poison-
ing framework designed to deter unauthorized fine-
tuning of Code LLMs without sacrificing code us-
ability (Fig. 3). Its design is guided by three guaran-
Algorithm 1 FunPoison
INPUT:
code dataset D, poisoning rate ρ ∈(0, 1]
OUTPUT:
poisoned dataset D′
1: function FUNPOISON(D)
2:
F ←∅ template pool
3:
for all c ∈D do
4:
S ←EXTRACTSTATEMENTS(c)
5:
for all s ∈S do
6:
s′ ←REPAIRTOCOMPILABLE(s)
7:
if s′ = ∅then
8:
continue
9:
end if
10:
t ←ANONYMIZEVARIABLE(s′)
11:
F ←F ∪{t}
12:
end for
13:
end for
14:
Dpoi ←SAMPLESUBSET(D, ρ)
15:
D′ ←D′/Dpoi
16:
for all c ∈Dpoi do
17:
F′ ←SAFETYFILTER(F)
18:
L ←SELECTINSERTIONSITES(c)
19:
T ←SAMPLETEMPLATES(F′)
20:
for all t ∈T do
21:
w ←SYNTHESIZEWEAKUSE(t)
22:
c ←INJECT(c, t, w, L)
23:
end for
24:
D′ ←D′ ∪{c}
25:
end for
26: end function
tees: compilability, functionality preservation, and
practical persistence. To satisfy these guarantees,
FUNPOISON synthesizes execution-inert, compil-
able templates and injects them into executed code
paths under strict safety constraints.
3.1
Code Template Generation
This module constructs the template pool that un-
derpins FUNPOISON, enforcing the guarantees of
compilability and functionality preservation re-
quired for downstream poisoning. Effective and
stealthy poisoning requires code fragments that can
be reused across projects while remaining safe to
transplant. We therefore draw templates from large-
scale real-world code corpora, since poisoning
based on narrow or repetitive patterns is more likely
to be brittle or easily sanitized. However, raw snip-
pets from such corpora are rarely reusable in their

original form, as they are often incomplete, context-
dependent, or unsafe when relocated. To address
this, FUNPOISON adopts a compilation-driven and
name-aware pipeline that refines real-world code
into reusable templates, as shown in lines 2-13 of
Alg. 1. Concretely, template generation is orga-
nized into three steps: (i) Statement Extraction,
identifying executable statement-level fragments;
(ii) Compilation Repair, converting them into inde-
pendently compilable units; and (iii) Name Extrac-
tion and Conflict-Aware Reuse, tracking identifier
metadata and normalizing or renaming names when
needed.
Statement Extraction.
As the first step, we ex-
tract statement-level fragments from executable
code outside type declarations (Alg. 1, line 4).
Statement-level units strike a balance between
expressiveness and portability: they capture di-
verse real-world usage patterns while remaining
lightweight enough to be reused across different
contexts. Many extracted statements are not self-
contained, as they may reference implicit context
such as surrounding declarations or imports. Dis-
carding such fragments would significantly reduce
the coverage and diversity of the template pool.
Instead, we retain these candidates and normalize
them into standalone statement fragments by re-
moving irrelevant type blocks and comments, and
partitioning the remaining code into individual ex-
ecutable statements. This step yields a broad and
diverse set of statement-level candidates that serve
as the input to subsequent compilation repair and
safety enforcement stages.
Compilation repair. The goal of compilation re-
pair is to maximize template coverage while guar-
anteeing independent compilability, which is es-
sential for safe large-scale injection. Statement-
level fragments extracted from real-world code
are often incomplete or context-dependent (e.g.,
missing imports, undeclared types, or bare allo-
cations), and discarding them would substantially
reduce diversity. We therefore adopt a compilation-
driven repair strategy that reconstructs only the
minimal context required for successful compi-
lation. Concretely, REPAIRTOCOMPILE(Alg. 1,
line 6) resolves all referenced types and normalizes
incomplete constructs. Referenced classes are an-
alyzed to distinguish standard library types from
user-defined ones: JDK classes are materialized
as explicit imports, while non-JDK types are re-
placed with lightweight same-file stubs to elimi-
nate missing dependencies.1 Fully qualified names
are simplified to short forms and redundant stubs
are removed to avoid naming conflicts.2 Bare al-
locations (e.g., new T(args);) are rewritten as
assignments with fresh local variables to ensure
syntactic completeness.3 The repaired fragment,
together with its synthesized imports, declarations,
and stubs, is wrapped into a minimal compilation
unit and validated via JAVAC, retaining only frag-
ments that compile successfully. This process con-
sistently transforms incomplete snippets into stable,
self-contained templates for downstream name han-
dling, filtering, and controlled injection.
Name Extraction and Conflict-Aware Reuse.
After REPAIRTOCOMPILE, each candidate state-
ment is represented as a set s′ that bundles the
repaired snippet with its required imports, synthe-
sized preamble, and lightweight stubs, yielding a
pool of concise and independently compilable tem-
plates suitable for reuse. The ANONYMIZEVARI-
ABLE routine (Alg. 1, line 10) extracts identifiers,
method names, and class names, and records both
the original names and placeholder-normalized
variants. In the default injection pipeline, non-
conflicting names are preserved to maintain nat-
ural code style, while local variables that collide
with identifiers in the host scope are renamed to
fresh names during conflict resolution. Finally, the
repaired snippet, its auxiliary context, and the asso-
ciated name metadata are consolidated into a nor-
malized record t and added to the global template
set F (lines 11), which serves as the foundation for
subsequent controlled injection.
The template pool can be extracted from the pro-
tected corpus or from an external corpus. In our
experiments, we randomly sample templates from
a large protected corpus, which improves syntac-
tic compatibility while avoiding repeated reuse of
any small set of source fragments. Some original
identifier names may be preserved when they are
available and non-conflicting, but the retained con-
text is constrained by statement-level extraction
1Stubs contain empty method bodies and no side effects.
2For example, occurrences of java.util.List are rewrit-
ten as List with an explicit import added. Any synthesized
stub that would shadow or duplicate an imported standard-
library type is removed, ensuring that each type name in the
compilation unit has a unique and unambiguous definition.
3A bare allocation refers to a standalone object construc-
tion without an assignment target (e.g., new T();), which
is often flagged as useless or removed by static analysis and
preprocessing. Rewriting it as an assignment (e.g., T tmp =
new T();) preserves compilability and enables subsequent
weak-use synthesis without affecting program behavior.

and minimal compilable repair: templates typically
contain only sparse local names, synthesized decla-
rations, and lightweight stubs rather than complete
algorithms or surrounding control-flow logic. If de-
sired, a deployment can further reduce these local
lexical traces by using an external template source
or applying stronger name normalization before
release.
3.2
Controlled Injection
This module enforces functionality preservation
and stealthy persistence via controlled injection,
comprising (i) safety filtering, (ii) weak-use synthe-
sis, and (iii) execution-safe site selection.
Safety Filtering.
In this stage (Alg.1, line17),
we enforce behavioral safety under a conservative
policy, addressing the risk that seemingly harmless
fragments may become unsafe when relocated. We
therefore prioritize aggressive pruning, removing
any template that could affect compilability, ex-
ecution stability, or portability. To achieve this,
we apply a two-tier safety filtering framework (Ta-
ble 7 in the Appendix A.1.1) that jointly addresses
semantic and operational risks. The first tier con-
sists of conceptual rules based on semantic rea-
soning, which exclude patterns that may appear
syntactically valid but are unsafe when relocated
across projects, such as control-flow disruptions,
reflective dependencies, or shared-state interac-
tions. The second tier applies programmatic rules
using lightweight static analysis to remove frag-
ments exhibiting concrete side effects, including
I/O, concurrency, process control, and non-local
state mutations. Together, these filters ensure that
retained templates are execution-inert and portable,
enabling safe controlled injection.
Weak-use Synthesis.
Conceptually, weak-use
synthesis ensures that injected fragments survive
compilation and preprocessing, preserving poi-
soning signals without altering observable behav-
ior. The weak-use pool balances three require-
ments—diversity, behavioral neutrality, and con-
ciseness—to avoid repetitive patterns prone to de-
tection, preserve program semantics, and minimize
interference with compilation, thereby improving
the robustness and stealth of injected fragments. To
address this, we synthesize type-driven weak-use
statements (Alg.1, line 21) that semantically con-
sume declared variables without altering program
behavior. For each variable, a weak-use expres-
sion is sampled from a curated pool (Table 8 in the