SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to
Uncover Rootkits
Paras Ghodeshwar1[0009−0009−2301−007X], Sandeep K
Shukla2[0000−0001−5525−7426], Anand Handa3[0000−0003−0075−1165], Nitesh
Kumar3[0000−0003−0998−0925], and
1 Department of Computer Science and Enginerring,
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
parasg@cse.iitk.ac.in
2 International Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad, India
sandeeps@iiit.ac.in
3 C3iHub Center, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, India
{anand, niteshkr}@c3ihub.iitk.ac.in
Abstract. Rootkits are among the most elusive types of malware, ca-
pable of bypassing traditional static analysis methods due to their meta-
morphic behavior. Signature-based detection techniques struggle against
these threats, necessitating a shift toward dynamic analysis approaches.
We propose SeqShield, a behavior-based rootkit detection approach de-
signed specifically for the Windows OS, leveraging API call sequences
for dynamic behavior analysis. Instead of relying on static signatures,
SeqShield examines the execution patterns of API calls, which inherently
reflect malicious intent. Analyzing API sequences, we can effectively iden-
tify rootkit-like behavior. We also employed a metamorphic code engine
to generate 10× mutated variants of rootkits, demonstrating their ob-
fuscation strategies. SeqShield applies n-gram analysis to extract bigram
and trigram features from these API call sequences, enabling effective de-
tection of rootkit-like activity. Among the models tested, Random Forest
achieves the highest accuracy of 97.27% (bigram) and 96.17% (trigram).
To optimize performance and decrease the dimension, we apply feature
importance ranking using the Gini Impurity Index, iteratively selecting
the most significant features. The optimized lower-dimensional feature
matrix significantly enhances detection efficiency without sacrificing ac-
curacy. Using the optimized feature set, our approach achieves 96.72%
accuracy for bigrams and 97.81% accuracy for trigrams.
Keywords: Kernel-Level Rootkits· Rootkits· Cybersecurity· NGrams·
NLP· Gini Index· MetaMe.
1
Introduction
Malware has become a serious problem in today’s digital world, and rootkits
are one of the most dangerous types. They work secretly, hiding deep inside the
operating system to avoid being noticed and keeping control over the computer
arXiv:2604.23812v1 [cs.CR] 26 Apr 2026

2
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
for long periods. Their ability to compromise system integrity and security makes
detecting rootkits a critical area of cybersecurity research.
Adversaries often employ rootkits to stealthily conceal the presence of ma-
licious programs, files, network connections, services, drivers, and other critical
system components. Rootkits achieve this by intercepting, hooking, and manip-
ulating operating system API calls to obscure system information from security
tools and administrators. Rootkits or rootkit-enabling functionalities can oper-
ate at various levels of a system. They may reside in user space, within the kernel,
or even deeper in the system architecture, including the hypervisor, Master Boot
Record (MBR), or system firmware [2].
Kernel-level rootkits are considered the most dangerous and sophisticated
type within the rootkit family, often referred to as next-generation rootkits due
to their advanced capabilities, including kernel hooks and data structure manip-
ulation. Unlike first-generation rootkits, which primarily operated in user mode,
kernel-level rootkits of the second and third generations transitioned to the ker-
nel, providing attackers with deeper access and greater control over the operat-
ing system. These features make kernel-level rootkits exceptionally difficult to
detect and remove, posing a significant threat to system security [10]. To con-
ceal malicious activities or modify system behavioral techniques employed to de-
velop kernel-level rootkits, such as IRP (I/O Request Packet) hooks, SSDT (Sys-
tem Service Descriptor Table) hooks, IDT (Interrupt Descriptor Table) hooks,
DKOM (Direct Kernel Object Manipulation), and virtual file system hooking.
Among these, DKOM is considered a third-generation rootkit technique as it
directly manipulates kernel data structure [9].
To tackle these challenges, we propose SeqShield, a novel approach that lever-
ages API call sequences to detect rootkit-like behavior. Our method utilizes NLP
techniques, specifically bigram and trigram sequences, to analyze API call pat-
terns for identifying malicious activities.
We did our experiment on the Windows operating system because it’s widely
used and often targeted by rootkits. Our dataset included a balanced mix of
known rootkits and normal (benign) executables, which helped in training the
model fairly. Malware writers/developers often use tricks to hide their code and
avoid getting caught, we used an obfuscation tool to make our test cases more
realistic. To study how the executable behaves, we looked at sequences of API
calls made during execution. We created two types of feature sets from this
data: bigrams (pairs of API calls) and trigrams (triplets of API calls). These
patterns helped us spot suspicious behavior similar to rootkits. Although these
feature sets contained both relevant and irrelevant features, we employed a novel
approach using the Gini impurity index to rank and extract the most relevant
ones. Instead of using a fixed threshold, we divided the sorted features into top-
ranked chunks and identified the subset where the model’s F1-score peaked. This
allowed us to significantly reduce the dimensionality of the feature space while
retaining high predictive performance. With fewer but more relevant features,
our model still performed as well or even better than the full feature set. It also

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
3
worked well in identifying new rootkits it hadn’t seen before, showing that the
model is able to generalize and catch unknown threats.
The key contribution of our research are as follows:
– Developed a lightweight rootkit detection model using API call sequences,
achieving high accuracy with minimal computational overhead.
– Used a Metamorphic Code Engine to simulate obfuscation, showing hash
changes that evade VirusTotal detection, aligning with the Pyramid of Pain
concept [3].
– Applied Gini Impurity Index to rank and select key features, reducing feature
size while maintaining model accuracy and efficiency.
– Validated that top-ranked features common across Decision Tree and Ran-
dom Forest classifiers are most effective for rootkit detection.
– Relevant datasets, feature matrices, and algorithms will be shared upon re-
quest if deemed necessary.
2
Background
The concept of rootkits dates back to the early 1990s when the term rootkit was
first introduced in the context of UNIX-like operating systems [19]. A rootkit
refers to a toolkit that allows attackers to gain and maintain unauthorized root-
level access to a system. These tools were initially developed to modify the oper-
ating system’s core functionalities, enabling attackers to conceal their activities
while maintaining control over the system.
The prominence of rootkits grew significantly in 2005 during the infamous
Sony BMG copy protection rootkit scandal. The rootkit, called Extended Copy
Protection (XCP), was surreptitiously installed on users’ systems through a mu-
sic CD. Once installed, it restricted user access and functionality, effectively
acting as a Digital Rights Management (DRM) mechanism but at the cost of
user privacy and system security [8,19]. Since this incident, rootkits have become
a focal point for both malware authors and cybersecurity researchers, with their
functionality and sophistication evolving substantially over the years.
2.1
Evolution of Rootkits
The evolution of rootkits can be categorized into three distinct generations:
First-Generation Rootkits (User-Level Rootkits) Early rootkits operated
at the user level and were primarily designed to execute malicious activities in
the user mode of the operating system. These included tasks such as stealing
passwords, collecting sensitive user information, and altering application-level
functionality. While these rootkits were relatively simple, they paved the way
for more advanced techniques [10,11].
Second-Generation Rootkits (Kernel-Level Rootkits) With advancements
in malware development, attackers moved beyond user-level operations to tar-
get the kernel—the core of the operating system. Kernel-level rootkits oper-
ate in kernel mode, granting them deeper access and control over the system.

4
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
These rootkits utilize system-level hooks to manipulate critical OS function-
alities. Techniques such as hooking System Call Tables, I/O Request Packets
(IRP), and Interrupt Descriptor Tables (IDT) became common, allowing rootk-
its to hide their presence and perform malicious tasks stealthily [10,11].
Third-Generation Rootkits (Kernel Data Structure Manipulation) The
latest generation of rootkits focuses on manipulating kernel-level data structures
to achieve invisibility and persistence. This category includes techniques like Di-
rect Kernel Object Manipulation (DKOM) and Dynamic Kernel Object Hooking.
Unlike traditional kernel hooks, DKOM modifies dynamic kernel data structures,
making detection significantly more challenging. For instance, attackers can hide
processes, kernel device drivers, and active ports by altering kernel-maintained
data structures without disrupting normal system functionality [10,11].
3
Related Work and Motivation
The detection of malicious software, i.e., malware, including rootkits, typically
relies on two primary methodologies: static analysis and dynamic analysis. Each
methodology has unique approaches, strengths, and limitations that, when com-
bined, provide complementary strategies for identifying and mitigating malicious
activity. Rootkit detection also benefits from these methodologies, with each of-
fering distinct advantages in identifying rootkits, including kernel-level rootkits.
Malware authors, including those developing rootkits, often employ obfuscation
techniques to evade signature-based detection systems. In this research, we utilize
MetaMe to mutate rootkit samples, demonstrating how obfuscation can bypass
signature-based detection.
The recent work has demonstrated the detection of the rootkits via three
major factors: Hardware information-based rootkit detection Approach, Memory
Forensics based rootkit detection, Behavior-based rootkit detection approaches.
Hardware-Based Rootkit Detection Recent studies have leveraged hardware-
level monitoring to detect rootkits by analyzing control registers and hardware
performance metrics. Liwei Zhou et al [21]. introduced a hardware-assisted in-
frastructure that monitors modifications to Control Register (CR3), identifying
unauthorized changes indicative of rootkits. Their approach extracts features
at the hardware level but performs off-chip analysis in a trusted software en-
vironment using mathematical classification techniques. Similarly, Baljit Singh
et al [14]. explored hardware performance counters (HPCs) by creating syn-
thetic rootkits (IRP, SSDT, DKOM) and capturing hardware-level execution
data. While they successfully detected SSDT and IRP rootkits, they failed to
detect DKOM rootkits due to their indirect manipulation of kernel data struc-
tures. However, Boyou Zhou et al [20]. highlighted that HPC-based detection
suffers from high false positive rates, making it impractical. Additionally, Joel
A. [5] et al. proposed a power-based rootkit detection method, leveraging nonlin-
ear phase-space analysis on power fluctuations to detect anomalies in execution
patterns.

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
5
Memory Forensics-Based Rootkit Detection Memory forensics has proven
to be an effective technique for dynamic rootkit analysis by extracting key
kernel structures from volatile memory. Mohammad Nadim et al [10]. demon-
strated that forensic tools like Volatility can analyze memory artifacts such as
EPROCESS, ETHREAD, LDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY, and CR0 to iden-
tify rootkits at the kernel level. Similarly, Xiao Wang et al [18]. utilized memory
dumps from VMs running on the OpenStack platform, ensuring trusted acquisi-
tion from the controller node. Their approach combined memory forensic tech-
niques with machine learning, where extracted malicious features were used to
train classifiers, achieving automated rootkit detection. By leveraging multiple
Volatility plugins [16], their model effectively captured suspicious memory mod-
ifications indicative of rootkits.
Behavior-Based Rootkit Detection Behavior-based detection methods fo-
cus on identifying anomalies in system activity caused by rootkits. Suresh Kumar
et al [15]. proposed a deep learning-based detection framework, where they col-
lected hooked data using McAfee’s Rootkit Detective and trained a reinforcement
learning model to recognize abnormal behavior. The trained model was then en-
hanced using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) for anomaly detection.
Kruegel et al [6]. introduced a binary analysis approach, statistically analyzing
kernel module interfaces for modifications that indicate rootkit presence. Patrick
Luckett et al [7]. explored neural network-based rootkit detection, utilizing system
call timing analysis to classify infected OS behavior. Their model, implemented
in MATLAB’s Neural Network Toolbox, achieved 82.8% accuracy in classifying
rootkit-infected system calls, demonstrating the effectiveness of behavioral anal-
ysis in rootkit detection.
Previous research has explored various approaches, each with its own draw-
backs. For instance, in hardware-based detection, the HPC method failed to
detect DKOM rootkits and exhibited a high false positive rate, making practi-
cal implementation challenging. Memory forensics is one of the most effective
techniques available; however, it is primarily suited for analyzing compromised
systems and is difficult to implement efficiently in a live system environment. Ad-
ditionally, detecting hooking-based methods may fail to identify DKOM rootkits,
as DKOM does not rely on hooking techniques. This limitation motivated us to
explore behavioral analysis as an alternative approach. Unlike traditional meth-
ods, behavioral analysis focuses on the actions and interactions of a program
rather than its static properties. We were particularly interested in analyzing
API call sequences, as they provide critical insights into how rootkits operate
within a system. By examining API call patterns, we aim to uncover rootkit-like
behavior, even in the presence of obfuscation techniques. We utilized MetaMe
to mutate rootkit samples to further validate our approach, demonstrating how
obfuscation can successfully evade signature-based detection. However, we can
effectively detect rootkit activities regardless of their evasion techniques through
behavioral analysis and API call sequence modeling.

6
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
4
SeqShields
SeqShield is a behavior analysis method designed to detect rootkit-like behav-
ior, specifically targeting kernel-level rootkits in the Windows environment. The
method is based on analyzing API sequences, which serve as fundamental pa-
rameters for a process to execute tasks, whether operating in user mode or kernel
mode. API calls act as an essential interface between software and the operating
system, enabling applications to request system resources, perform operations,
and communicate with hardware. Every program, whether benign or malicious,
interacts with the system through a sequence of API calls to execute its intended
functionality. These functions reside in ntdll.dll in user mode but internally tran-
sition to kernel mode via a system call mechanism. Regardless of whether a
rootkit operates at the kernel level or user level, it must rely on specific API call
sequences to execute its malicious functionalities. Even kernel-mode rootkits,
which operate with elevated privileges, typically require some form of user-mode
execution to trigger their behavior, since user-mode processes are responsible
for invoking system calls that eventually transition into the kernel. By analyzing
these API call sequences, SeqShield provides valuable insights into a program’s
behavior, enabling the distinction between legitimate and malicious activities
while effectively detecting rootkit-like behavior.
To analyze API call sequences, we employed the n-grams method, a widely
used technique in natural language processing (NLP) for modeling sequential
data. N-grams represent contiguous sequences of n items (in this case, API
calls) within a dataset [13]. This approach allows us to capture the immedi-
ate relationship between consecutive API calls, enabling a deeper understanding
of execution patterns. The ability of n-grams to preserve sequential dependencies
makes them particularly effective for behavioral analysis, as they help identify
recurring patterns that indicate malicious activity. Unlike other complex models
such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks may struggle with shorter
sequences and require additional mechanisms like attention mechanisms to weigh
important sequence segments properly. By leveraging N-grams, we can analyze
API call sequences to detect deviations from normal execution flow, making
it a robust technique for identifying rootkit-like behavior. In our analysis, we
specifically utilized bigram and trigram sequences, which capture the relation-
ships between two and three consecutive API calls, respectively. This approach
enables us to better understand the contextual dependencies within API se-
quences, improving the accuracy of our detection mechanism while maintaining
computational efficiency.
Architecture
This section describes the architecture(Fig 1) of the SeqShield model, which is
centered on analyzing API sequence patterns. We utilized multiple tools and
modeling techniques to achieve our objectives to derive the desired results.

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
7
610 Executables
Ubuntu Host
Machine
api
API Sequence
Extraction
Open Source Databse
Model Trainig - Selected Importance Features
Relevent Features
 Extraction
Low-dim
 Model Training
Results
Behavior
Executables
Windows Guest
Machine
40 Rootkits
300 Benign
MetaMe Code Engine
400 Mutated Rootkits
310 Samples 
90 Samples 
Testing
Data
Trained Model
Effective Trained Model
Results
Model Trainig 
Feature
Transformation
Bigram
Trigram
Training 
Data
RF
DT
XGB
LR
AdaB
SVM
KNN
Fig. 1. Architecture of SeqShield
4.1
Experimental Setup
Our experiments utilize multiple tools to collect and process data in a secure
environment. The experiments were conducted on an Intel® CoreTM i7-4700
CPU @ 3.40 GHz × 8, running a 64-bit Ubuntu 18.04.6 LTS operating system
with 16 GB of RAM and 1 TB of disk space. Ubuntu was used as the host OS,
with VirtualBox installed for virtualization. A Windows 7 Pro virtual machine
was configured with 2 GB of RAM and 32 GB of disk space. The latest version
of Cuckoo [4] was installed on the host machine, while the Cuckoo agent was
deployed on the virtual machine to facilitate malware analysis. Malware sam-
ples were executed in the Windows virtual machine, and activity reports were
transmitted to the host Ubuntu system via the Cuckoo agent. Additionally, we
employed MetaMe [12], a metamorphic code engine, to mutate the samples and
analyze their obfuscation behavior. To validate obfuscation, VirusTotal’s [17]
hash search was utilized for further verification.
4.2
Dataset
To create a dataset of rootkit malware, we downloaded 40 rootkit samples from
open sources such as MalwareBazaar [1]. These rootkits exhibited properties
such as evading detection, privilege escalation, and file manipulation.
Given the limited availability of rootkit samples and to demonstrate obfus-
cation techniques used by malware authors, we utilized MetaMe [12] to mutate

8
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
each malware sample ten times, resulting in 400 mutated rootkits. These samples
were divided into:
– 310 samples for analysis and model training
– 90 samples as test data (previously unseen by the model)
Additionally, we included 300 benign executables, consisting of general-purpose
applications like browsers and system processes. In total, our dataset comprised
610 executables for analysis and modeling.
4.3
Obfuscation Engine: MetaMe
MetaMe [12] is a simple metamorphic code engine that generates logically equiv-
alent versions of executable code. Malware authors leverage metamorphic tech-
niques to evade signature-based detection systems. In our experiment, MetaMe
was used to mutate rootkit samples, altering their hash values to remain unde-
tected by traditional antivirus solutions [12]. MetaMe Architecture Fig 2
MetaMe Code Engine
10 Mutated Samples
10X
Rootkit Sample
1 Mutated
Fig. 2. MetaMe Mutation Architecture
Each malware sample was passed through MetaMe in a recursive process:
1. If A is the original executable, MetaMe generates A1.
2. A1 is then passed through MetaMe to generate A2.
3. This process continues iteratively up to A10, resulting in ten variations of
the original sample (A1, A2, ..., A10).
These transformed samples were then analyzed to assess their detectability.
When tested against VirusTotal [17], most modified signatures remained unde-
tected, except for a few cases where hash values did not change significantly.
4.4
Experimental Methodology
For our experiment, we prepared 610 executable samples (310 rootkit malware
and 300 benignware).

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
9
Malware and Benignware Execution The sandbox environment was set up
by creating a virtual network and configuring Cuckoo [4] to establish an isolated
execution space for malware analysis. Once the sandbox was ready, the collected
malware samples were executed, generating detailed Cuckoo analysis reports.
These reports contained essential behavioral data, including process creation de-
tails, API calls made, files created or modified, network connections established,
memory dumps, and Indicators of Compromise (IOCs). From these reports, API
sequences were extracted alongside their execution timestamps. To enhance the
analysis, API calls were grouped into bigrams (pairs of API calls) and trigrams
(triplets of API calls) [13], incorporating time as a parameter to capture se-
quence patterns. Only unique API sequences were retained, and n-gram analysis
was performed to identify patterns indicative of rootkit behavior.
N-Gram Analysis We employed bi-gram and tri-gram feature engineering
techniques. Given a malware sample M containing an API sequence mi =
{a1, a2, ..., aj}:
– Bigram Sequence: {a1a2, a2a3, ..., aj−1aj}
– Trigram Sequence: {a1a2a3, ..., aj−2aj−1aj}
Using this method, we obtained, 12,007 unique bi-gram sequences and 68,442
unique tri-gram sequences. One-hot encoding was applied to prepare datasets for
machine learning models.
Classification Models We created two training and testing datasets: a bigram
matrix consisting of 610 rows (executables) and 12,008 columns representing API
calls, along with one label column, and a trigram matrix with 610 rows and 68,443
dimensions. To classify rootkit behavior, we employed multiple machine learning
classifiers from the scikit-learn package, including Decision Tree (DT), Random
Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Lo-
gistic Regression, AdaBoost, XGBoost, and Gradient Boosting. The dataset was
split into a 70:30 ratio for training and testing, ensuring a balanced evaluation
of model performance. Additionally, we used the joblib library to save trained
models, allowing for future classification of previously unseen traces.
4.5
Classification Results
In our experiment, we distributed the training and testing data in a 7:3 ratio.
Specifically, 70% of the dataset was used for training the Machine Learning
Models, while the remaining 30% was used for testing the models. In this section,
we describe the results obtained using the 30% testing dataset.
Using this testing dataset, we achieved the best accuracy of 97.2678% for
bigram and 96.1749% for trigram API sequence feature matrices using the
Random Forest Machine Learning Classifier. Tables 1 and 2 present the results of
our evaluation of bigram and trigram models, respectively. These tables showcase
key performance metrics, including accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score, for
the various machine learning classifiers used to assess model performance.

10
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
Table 1. Model performance on the test set for Bigram API sequences (values in
percentages).
Model
Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score
RF
97.268
97.274 97.268
97.268
XGBoost
96.175
96.180 96.175
96.174
LR
96.721
96.920 96.721
96.716
SVM
96.175
96.443 96.175
96.167
KNN
94.536
94.617 94.536
94.531
GB
96.175
96.180 96.175
96.174
DT
96.721
96.721 96.721
96.721
AdaBoost
95.628
95.974 95.628
95.616
Table 2. Model performance on the test set for Trigram API sequences (values in
percentages).
Model
Accuracy Precision Recall F1 Score
RF
96.175
96.443 96.175
96.167
XGBoost
94.536
95.066 94.536
94.514
LR
96.175
96.443 96.175
96.167
SVM
96.175
96.443 96.175
96.167
KNN
85.246
88.566 85.246
84.879
GB
95.082
95.516 95.082
95.066
DT
93.989
94.625 93.989
93.961
AdaBoost
95.082
95.516 95.082
95.066
5
Key Feature Importance Analysis
In our experiment, we utilized two datasets: one for bigram features and an-
other for trigram features. These datasets contain both relevant and irrelevant
features, which can impact the detection results. To identify the most significant
contributing features, we employed a feature importance for tree-based classi-
fier, which leverages Machine Learning’s feature importance ranking using Gini
Impurity Indexing. This method assigns an importance score between [0, 1] to
each feature.
Tree-based classifiers, such as Decision Trees and Random Forests, select fea-
tures for splitting based on their ability to reduce Gini Impurity [22]. Features
that contribute to larger reductions in impurity are deemed more important,
making them highly relevant for classification. This approach not only aids in
feature selection but also helps extract the most informative features that signif-
icantly impact detection accuracy. By reducing the dimensionality of the feature
matrix, we optimize computational efficiency without compromising detection
performance. Our hypothesis is that by selecting only the most relevant fea-
tures, we can effectively detect rootkit-like behavior with high precision while
significantly lowering computational overhead. This ensures a balance between
accuracy and efficiency, making our approach fast and scalable.

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
11
5.1
Feature Selection
To extract the most significant features from bigram and trigram sequences, we
utilized Gini impurity-based feature importance indexing. For each feature in
the n-gram feature vector, importance scores were computed using tree-based
classifiers that rely on Gini impurity to assess the contribution of each feature
toward classification performance. These Gini-based importance scores range be-
tween 0 and 1, where a higher value indicates a greater role in reducing impurity
during the decision-making process. Once computed, we perform the following
task based on their Gini importance scores.
– For the bigram dataset, we had 12,007 features. These were sorted as {B1, B2,
..., B12,007} based on their importance score, ensuring that Bi > Bi+1.
– Similarly, for the trigram dataset, we had 68,442 features, sorted as {T1, T2,
..., T68,442} where Ti > Ti+1.
Further for classification results, we divided the sorted features into chunks of
100 and trained the classifier incrementally. Rather than selecting features based
on a Gini threshold which would lead to variable chunk sizes and potentially skew
the analysis, we chose to divide the sorted features into fixed-size chunks of 100.
This fixed-size chunking ensures consistency across experimental runs and allows
us to evaluate how model performance scales as more features are included. The
process is followed in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1 Incremental Feature Selection and Classification
Require: Sorted
feature
sets
for
bigram
{fb1, fb2, ..., fb12,007}
and
trigram
{ft1, ft2, ..., ft68,442}, Tree-based classifiers {DT, RF, AdaB, XGB, GB}
1: Initialize chunk size k ←100
2: Initialize maximum F1-score F1max ←0
3: Initialize best feature count nmax ←0
4: for i = k to n step k do
5:
Select top i features:
6:
For bigram: {fb1, fb2, ..., fbi}
7:
For trigram: {ft1, ft2, ..., fti}
8:
for each classifier C in {DT, RF, AdaB, XGB, GB} do
9:
Train C with selected features
10:
Compute performance metrics (Precision, Recall, F1-score, Accuracy)
11:
if F1-score > F1max then
12:
Update F1max ←current F1-score
13:
Update nmax ←i
14:
end if
15:
end for
16: end for
17: Output the first nmax features where F1-score is maximized for both bigram and
trigram.
By analyzing the recorded F1-scores, we determined that the most contribut-
ing features correspond to the first chunk where the F1-score reached its maxi-

12
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
mum. These features were considered the most relevant for detecting malicious
behavior. After reaching the maximum F1-score, additional features often re-
sulted in a decline in model performance. This suggests that while the initial
n×100 features contributed positively, subsequent features may have introduced
noise or irrelevant information, thereby reducing accuracy.
Interestingly, we observed fluctuations in results when using Decision Tree
and Random Forest classifiers. However, other models such as XGBoost, Ad-
aBoost, and Gradient Boosting showed more stable results across all feature
chunks. Therefore, Decision Tree and Random Forest were chosen for further
analysis to identify features that exhibit rootkit-like behavior. In Fig.3, we can
see the bar graph where the Decision Tree classifier reaches the maximum F1-
score at Top n × 100 features where n is 14, shorted using Gini Impurity Index.
Similarly, we considering the Decision Tree classifier for Trigram with Top n×100
features where n is 69 and 19 in the case of Random Forest, where the F1-score
is nearly same both the case.
Bigram - DT
Bigram - RF
Trigram - DT
Trigram - RF
90
92
94
96
98
100
F1-Score (%)
97.81%
97.27%
95.67%
96.17%
F1-Score (%)
Top n Features
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Top n Features
1400
700
6900
1900
Fig. 3. Model performance comparison for Top n-feature where F1-score is maximum
5.2
Identifying the Most Contributing Features
To pinpoint the most relevant features, we identified the intersection of the top
n×100 features from both Decision Tree and Random Forest classifiers where the
F1-score is max. The overlapping features were considered the most informative
for rootkit detection. Let us consider the set A, B, C, D for the selected feature
sets for bigram and trigram classifiers be defined as follows:

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
13
A = {fbDT
1
, fbDT
2
, . . . , fbDT
1,400}
B = {fbRF
1
, fbRF
2
, . . . , fbRF
700}
C = {ftDT
1
, ftDT
2
, . . . , ftDT
6,900}
D = {ftRF
1
, ftRF
2
, . . . , ftRF
1,900}
To find features that are important across models, we look for overlaps in their
top-ranked features. This is done by calculating the intersection of the feature
sets from each model. In our case, we compared the most significant features
chosen by both the Random Forest and the Decision Tree classifiers, using both
bigram and trigram feature vectors. If a feature appears in the lists of both
classifiers, it means that feature is consistently recognized as important. These
overlapping features are valuable because they show strong and stable influence
on the model classification.
|A ∩B| = 76
|C ∩D| = 483
For bigram we have found 76 common features from the Decision Tree and
Random Forest classifier where we have seen the first F1-score max. Similarly,
for trigram we have found 483 common features which are really contributing.
Our approach demonstrates high reduction of the feature matrix dimension like
for bigram, we had 12,007 features contains both relevant and irrelevant features,
now we have 76 features which are more relevant and really contributing towards
results for rootkit detection, and for the trigram, we had 68,442 features now we
have 483 most relevant features. With our approach, in both bigram and trigram
we have seen a heavy reduction of dimension from higher dimension to lower
dimension. We have further trained the machine learning classifier based on these
lower dimension i.e. considering only most relevant features. While have tested
this hypothesis using the 30% testing data that was split from feature matrix
for model testing for the higher dimension data. We have successfully achieved
the accuracy of 96.72% for bigram and 97.81% for trigram using the Random
Forest classifier. These results demonstrates our hypothesis for considering the
most relevant features meanwhile decrease featured dimension drastically. For
bigram and for trigram sequences, a few listed features are listed in Table 3 for
Bigram Sequences and Table 4 for Trigram Sequences along with Justification.
6
Model Testing
During our experiment, we utilized MetaMe to mutate malware samples, ensur-
ing that 90 samples remained undetected by the model. These rootkit samples
were intentionally excluded from the training phase to evaluate our model’s abil-
ity to detect unknown threats. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach,

14
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
Table 3. Top Common Features for Bigram Features.
API Sequence
Justification
(GetTempPathW, DeviceIo-
Control)
DeviceIoControl, to interact with device drivers, espe-
cially in the temp directory, may indicate attempt exploit
vulnerabilities in drivers or install rootkits.
(GetTempPathW,
NtCre-
ateFile)
Temp
directory/file
creation
in
low-level
sys
call
(ntoskrnl), could be used for staging malicious payload.
This rootkit behavior can modify critical system files to
facilitate stealth or control.
(GetSystemTimeAsFileTime,
NtQueryKey)
Querying registry keys after system time retrieval may in-
dicate malicious configuration checks. Rootkit behavior
for creating unique payloads or registry based on times-
tamp.
(GetSystemDirectoryW,
RegOpenKeyExW)
Querying the system directory and accessing the registry
are activities that, when combined, could indicate an at-
tempt to tamper with system configurations.
(HttpQueryInfoA,
Re-
gOpenKeyExW)
HTTP query combined with registry access suggests
network-based configuration tampering. Allows rootkit
to dynamically adapt to instructions from remote servers
for long term malware activity.
Table 4. Top Common Features for Trigram Features.
API Sequence
Justification
(IsDebuggerPresent,
Devi-
ceIoControl,
NtQuerySys-
temInformation)
Rootkits often use DeviceIoControl to interact with
stealth-enabling kernel components. Malware and rootk-
its often use NtQuerySystemInformation to manipulate
or hide processes or modules.
(IsDebuggerPresent, Create-
DirectoryW,
DeviceIoCon-
trol)
The sequence has rootkit-like potential if the APIs are be-
ing used to evade detection, hide malicious files, or com-
municate with system-level drivers (IRPs), potentially as
part of privilege escalation and maintaining persistence.
(IsDebuggerPresent,
Cre-
ateThread, NtCreateFile)
Checking the debugging environment, and CreateThread
could be used for spawning threads to perform malicious
actions. NtCreateFile could be used to create or manip-
ulate files, including hidden or system files.
(LdrGetProcedureAddress,
NtAllocateVirtualMemory,
NtProtectVirtualMemory)
Both
NtAllocateVirtualMemory
and
NtProtectVir-
tualMemory are associated with memory manipulation,
commonly used by rootkits to manipulate or hide
malicious code in memory.
(IsDebuggerPresent,
Get-
SystemDirectoryW, NtAllo-
cateVirtualMemory)
Debugger detection, system directory access, and mem-
ory allocation all point toward a potential rootkit at-
tempting to hide itself in system memory or files. Rootkit
behavior related to memory manipulation and evasion.
we extracted API sequence features from unknown rootkit samples and tested

SeqShield: A Behavioral Analysis Approach to Uncover Rootkits
15
90 Samples Not part of Model Training
Trained Model
Rootkit or Benign
Fig. 4. Model Prediction for Unseen Samples
them using our trained machine learning classifier. We conducted experiments
on both high-dimensional feature matrices (containing both relevant and irrel-
evant features) and optimized lower-dimensional feature sets (comprising only
the most significant features). Using a dataset of 90 previously unseen rootkit
samples.
For the higher-dimensional feature matrix, where both relevant and irrelevant
features were included, the Random Forest classifier correctly identified 77 out
of 90 samples as rootkits for bigram sequences and 70 out of 90 samples for
trigram sequences. However, when using the lower-dimensional feature matrix,
which retained only the most relevant features, the classifier performed better by
correctly identifying 80 out of 90 samples for bigrams as a rootkit and achieving
a perfect detection rate of 90 out of 90 for trigrams.
These findings validate our hypothesis that analyzing API call sequences
enhances rootkit detection. The improved detection rates with optimized feature
selection confirm that reducing dimensionality enhances classification accuracy
and minimizes computational overhead. Additionally, the high detection rate
for previously unseen rootkits demonstrates the model’s strong generalization
ability, making it a viable approach for detecting sophisticated and evolving
malware threats in real-world environments.
7
Limitations and Future Work
Future research can focus on expanding the rootkit database, which is currently
limited in scope via publicly available database. Institutions with access to larger
and more diverse datasets could facilitate the development of a more robust
model by contributing additional samples of known rootkits and rootkit-like
behaviors. Further, we can extend our approach to quadgrams or more consec-
utive sequences. However, incorporating quadgrams would significantly increase
the feature matrix, potentially up to 10 times, leading to higher computational
overhead. Future work should explore optimized feature selection and dimension-
ality reduction techniques to balance performance with efficiency when scaling
to higher-order N-grams. Meanwhile, our approach has demonstrated potential
in detecting rootkits or rootkit-like behavior. It may flag off generic processes as

16
P. Ghodeshwar et al.
rootkits, processes such as privilege escalation, that may resemble rootkit-like
activity. But this drawback can be overcome by training on a broader rootkit
dataset and incorporating higher-order n-gram features.
8
Conclusion
SeqShield presents a robust approach for extracting API sequences and training
machine learning classifiers to detect rootkits. Our method achieved an impres-
sive 97.27% accuracy using a bigram feature matrix and 96.17% accuracy with
a trigram feature matrix, both evaluated with the Random Forest Classifier.
Additionally, we demonstrated how rootkits leverage obfuscation techniques to
evade traditional signature-based IDS. By leveraging the Gini impurity index,
we effectively reduced the feature space, retaining only the most impactful fea-
tures while eliminating irrelevant ones. This reduction significantly decreased
computational overhead and reduced the dimensionality of the featured matrix
without compromising model accuracy. Furthermore, we validated SeqShield’s
detection capabilities by analyzing previously unseen rootkit traces, confirming
its effectiveness in identifying modern and evasive kernel-level rootkits.