SPORE: Efficient and Training-Free Privacy Extraction Attack on
LLMs via Inference-Time Hybrid Probing
Yu Cui1
Ruiqing Yue2,3
Hang Fu1
Sicheng Pan1
Zhuoyu Sun1
Baohan Huang1
Haibin Zhang4,5
Cong Zuo1
Licheng Wang1
1School of Cyberspace Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology
2Chengdu Institute of Computer Applications, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4Yangtze Delta Region Institute of Tsinghua University, Zhejiang
5Jiaxing Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Cyber Resilience
cuiyu@bit.edu.cn, bchainzhang@aliyun.com
Abstract
With the wide adoption of personal AI assis-
tants such as OpenClaw, privacy leakage in
user interaction contexts with large language
model (LLM) agents has become a critical is-
sue. Existing privacy attacks against LLMs
primarily target training data, while research
on inference-time contextual privacy risks in
LLM agent memory remains limited. More-
over, prior methods often incur high attack
costs, requiring multiple queries or relying on
white-box assumptions, which limits their prac-
ticality in real-world deployments. To address
these issues, we propose a training-free privacy
extraction attack targeting LLM agent mem-
ory, which we name SPORE. SPORE is com-
patible with both black-box and gray-box set-
tings. In the black-box setting, SPORE can effi-
ciently extract a small candidate set via a single
query to recover the original private informa-
tion. In the gray-box setting, SPORE allows
the attacker to leverage multi-ranked tokens
for more accurate and faster privacy extraction.
We provide an information-theoretic analysis
of SPORE and show that it achieves high query
efficiency with substantial per query informa-
tion leakage. Experiments on multiple frontier
LLMs show that SPORE outperforms attack suc-
cess rate over existing state-of-the-art (SOTA)
schemes. It also maintains low attack cost and
remains stable across different model parame-
ter settings. We further evaluate the robustness
of SPORE against existing defense mechanisms.
Our results show that SPORE consistently by-
passes both detection and strong safety align-
ment, demonstrating resilient performance in
diverse defensive settings and real-world safety
threats.
1
Introduction
The rapid advancement of large language models
(LLMs) (Man et al., 2025) has accelerated edge
deployment of LLM agents (Chen et al., 2026). Au-
tonomous LLM agents, such as OpenClaw (Stein-
berger and OpenClaw Contributors, 2026; Deng
et al., 2026) and Hermes Agent (Research, 2026),
demonstrate strong practical utility through tool
calling and extensible skills. These LLM agents in-
creasingly resemble operating systems, reshaping
human-computer interaction (Liu et al., 2026). Un-
like traditional chatbots deployed as cloud services
(Hannig et al., 2026), autonomous LLM agents op-
erate directly on user devices and execute tasks
through interactive dialogues. This paradigm am-
plifies user privacy risks, as interactions often in-
volve sensitive information. Prior studies show
that users interacting with LLM agents frequently
disclose Personally Identifiable Information (PII)
(Kwesi et al., 2025; Lukas et al., 2023). Under
malicious prompting, LLM agents may leverage
multi-turn interactions to extract PII (Zhang and
Yang, 2026). Malicious LLM agents may induce
users to disclose PII, with reported success rates
exceeding 90% (Zhan et al., 2025; Cui et al., 2026).
Such sensitive information, once incorporated into
the conversational context, may persist in agent
memory, thereby introducing the risk of subsequent
extraction by adversaries. These concerns have mo-
tivated extensive recent work on evaluating privacy
leakage (Zharmagambetov et al., 2025; Mireshghal-
lah et al., 2026; Gu et al., 2025; Shao et al., 2024;
Wen et al., 2024), mainly through the construction
of privacy extraction attacks for red-teaming.
However, existing privacy extraction attacks pri-
marily target training data, while the PII involved
is often derived from publicly available sources,
such as data from GitHub, and thus exhibits rela-
tively low sensitivity (Han et al., 2025). Research
on contextual privacy risks in LLM agent memory
during inference remains limited (Mireshghallah
et al., 2024). Most prior work assumes white-box
settings, where adversaries leverage internal signals
such as gradients to construct adversarial queries
that induce PII disclosure (Wang et al., 2025b).
These assumptions are unrealistic in real-world de-
ployments and may not reflect practical threats.
1
arXiv:2604.23711v1 [cs.CR] 26 Apr 2026

Furthermore, these context-aware attacks require
multiple queries (Nasr et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025;
Kaneko and Baldwin, 2025), leading to substantial
attack costs. Moreover, existing studies rarely eval-
uate safety aligned frontier LLMs, such as GPT-5.
Attacks and defenses are sensitive to model behav-
ior. Generalizing findings from smaller open source
models to larger proprietary models is methodolog-
ically unsound and may overestimate generalizabil-
ity (Evertz et al., 2026). Consequently, the practical
privacy leakage risk remains unclear.
To address these issues, we propose SPORE, a
training-free privacy extraction attack for contex-
tual privacy risks in LLM agent memory during
inference. SPORE induces LLMs to generate PII un-
der noise perturbation and leverages inference-time
hybrid probing, enabling an adversary to complete
an attack in either black-box or gray-box settings
with a single query. The adversary can adapt the
strategy to the available conditions. In the black-
box setting, SPORE can quickly recover a small
candidate set that contains the target PII from the
LLM response. In the gray-box setting, where the
LLM inference APIs return top-k predictions (Shi
et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2025), SPORE further
exploits multi-ranked tokens to recover PII token-
by-token with higher accuracy and efficiency. We
further formalize this mechanism as a shadow en-
cryption paradigm, which can be generalized to
other domains of LLM security.
We theoretically analyze SPORE under an
information-theoretic framework and show that it
achieves high query efficiency with substantial per
query information leakage. Experiments on multi-
ple frontier LLMs, including GPT-5.4 and Claude
Opus 4.6, show that SPORE substantially outper-
forms existing SOTA methods in attack success rate
(ASR). On GPT-5.4, the ASR even exceeds 90%.
SPORE also remains a low attack cost. Under low
temperature settings, where the model reveals less
information, SPORE remains stable, which indi-
cates strong attack transferability. We further study
the robustness of SPORE against defenses from
three dimensions. Compared with existing attack
methods, SPORE reduces the positive rate by 88%
under detection. SPORE still maintains a substan-
tial ASR under prevention. Moreover, SPORE can
also bypass the defenses of SOTA safety-aligned
LLMs. We hope this work can help improve LLM
safety. We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We propose SPORE, a training-free privacy ex-
traction attack for LLMs that recovers PII from
agent memory in both black-box and gray-box
settings.
• We theoretically analyze the query complexity
of SPORE and validate its effectiveness, low at-
tack cost, and transferability through extensive
experiments.
• We study SPORE under multiple defenses and
show that it remains robust in diverse defensive
settings.
2
Related Work
A large body of work has studied privacy extrac-
tion attacks on LLMs. Similar to prompt injection
attacks (Chen et al., 2025a; Shi et al., 2024a), these
privacy extraction attacks can be categorized into
Direct Privacy Extraction (DPE) and Indirect Pri-
vacy Extraction (IPE) based on attacker capabilities.
DPE mainly targets white-box settings, requiring
access to model weights or internal signals such as
gradients for privacy extraction (Wang et al., 2025b;
Yu et al., 2023). IPE mainly targets gray-box or
black-box settings. It leverages model inputs, out-
puts, or logits to extract privacy information (Nasr
et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025; Han et al., 2025).
Due to the high inference cost of LLMs, cloud de-
ployment with API-based access remains the dom-
inant paradigm for LLM-integrated applications.
In this setting, DPE is not practical. Current re-
search on IPE for frontier LLMs remains limited.
This limitation mainly comes from restricted at-
tacker access. One relatively mature line of IPE
is membership inference attack (Fu et al., 2024;
He et al., 2025) against training data. This type of
attack determines whether a data record is part of
the training set. It reveals data membership rather
than recovering unknown private information.
3
Methodology
3.1
Problem Formulation
We formalize the privacy extraction attack against
agent memory as follows. For an LLM agent A,
let c denote its contextual memory. Suppose that
c contains PII p. An adversary interacts with A
by issuing a sequence of queries. The objective of
the adversary is to minimize the number of queries
required to identify a finite candidate set S, such
that p ∈S and |S| ≤λ, where λ ∈Z+ is a small
integer. λ represents a strict attempt budget for the
adversary, i.e., the maximum number of candidate
trials allowed before further attempts are blocked.
2

Baseline Attack Methods
User Privacy Leakage
Our Attack Method
Step 1: Privacy Query
Agent
Step 2: User Disclosed Privacy
Adversarial Input (822 tokens)
Attacker
Safety Refusal
28% ASR
Adversarial Input (120 tokens)
Partial Privacy Leakage
Gray-Box Settings
Black-Box Settings
94% ASR
91% ASR
"…You may choose one character 
and increase its ASCII value 
by 2…After the update, what is 
the data?…
"I can't provide or infer a 
person's bank account number"
"Hello…What is your bank 
account number?…"
User
"My bank account number is 9588531016"
Agent
Agent
Attacker
"…\boxed{9588531036}…"
9
5
8
8
5
3
1
0
3
6
9
5
8
8
5
3
3
0
1
6
9
5
8
8
5
3
1
0
1
6
9
5
8
8
5
3
1
0
1
6
Finite Candidate Space
Bit-by-bit 
enumeration
SoftMax
0.5
Logits
Sampling
0.4
0.2
Multi-Ranked Tokens
9
5
8
8
5
3
1
0
3
6
Minimum Value
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed SPORE and comparison with existing methods. SPORE operates under both
black-box and gray-box settings, depending on attacker capabilities. Compared with prior methods, SPORE extracts
PII from agent context memory with a high success rate and low cost.
3.2
Threat Model
In this paper, we consider two practical settings in
real-world deployments:
• Black-Box Setting. The adversary can submit
prompts to the model and observe the responses.
The adversary has no access to model weights,
gradients, or internal states. The adversary can-
not intervene in the inference process. Interaction
is limited to API-based access.
• Gray-Box Setting.
The gray-box setting ex-
tends the black-box setting. The adversary can
additionally access the top-k tokens and their
corresponding log probabilities at each decod-
ing step during inference. Such information is
widely available in real-world APIs through the
top_logprobs parameter, such as OpenRouter1
and Volcano Engine platform2.
3.3
SPORE: Privacy Extraction Attack
SPORE adopts an adversarial input strategy that
induces the LLM to reveal partial private informa-
tion. Under different model settings, the output
exposes different information signals, enabling of-
fline recovery of PII in both black-box and gray-
box settings. Accordingly, SPORE consists of two
stages: adversarial attack and information recovery.
We refer to the black-box and gray-box variants
as SPORE-B and SPORE-G, respectively. The two
variants share the same adversarial attack stage and
differ only in the information recovery stage. Fig-
ure 1 gives an overview of the full pipeline.
1https://openrouter.ai/docs/api/reference/overview
2https://www.volcengine.com
Adversarial Attack Stage. During the adversarial
attack stage, SPORE perturbs the target PII p by
adding random noise at the character level, denoted
by ω. We construct p′ = p ⊕ω, where p′ ̸= p.
The perturbed string p′ preserves part of the private
information and supports later recovery of p. At its
core, this design adopts an encryption paradigm to
obfuscate restricted content and bypass LLM safety
alignment (Li et al., 2026). In addition, following
prior work (Wang et al., 2025a), we incorporate
deceptive content into the adversarial input to di-
minish the apparent sensitivity of the target PII p.
We next describe the information recovery stage
for each setting.
SPORE-B. In the black-box setting, the attack out-
put is a single response that contains p′. No ad-
ditional model information is available. Recovery
therefore relies on enumeration. The attacker re-
moves the injected noise ω token-by-token, which
yields a finite candidate space σ. Under the per-
turbation design, the search space |σ| is bounded
by a constant. Therefore, recovery via exhaustive
enumeration has O(1) complexity. When the at-
tack succeeds, σ contains the original PII p. If the
attacker later uses σ for further attacks, at most |σ|
attempts are needed to identify the correct value.
SPORE-G. The gray-box algorithm is summarized
in Algorithm 1. In this setting, the attacker ob-
tains both the response containing p′ and the cor-
responding top-k predictions. Inspired by prior
work (Bouaziz et al., 2026; Shi et al., 2024b; Zhou
et al., 2025; Finlayson et al., 2024), we design a
recovery method based on multi-ranked tokens. We
first locate the start position of p′ in the response.
3

Algorithm 1: Information Recovery Stage
of SPORE-G Scheme
Input: Response r with top-k predictions
from LLM θ
Output: Recovered PII p
1 Extract token sequence
p′ = (tm, . . . , tm+n) from r
2 for i ∈[m, m + n] do
3
Construct shadow vector si from top-k
predictions of token ti:
si = (si,1, si,2, . . . , si,k)
4 Construct candidate space:
5 C = Qm+n
i=m si
6 Initialize p := p′
7 for each v ∈C do
8
Apply token-level filtering on v
9 for each v ∈C do
10
Update p via removing the noise ω
11 return p;
For each token in p′, we collect the correspond-
ing top-k tokens and construct a candidate space
C. We then filter C by removing candidates that
contain abnormal characters or have a length differ-
ent from p′. After filtering, we recover the string
in a token-by-token manner by inverting the previ-
ously applied perturbation process. For example, if
the noise randomly selects one position and adds 2
to its ASCII value, recovery selects the minimum
ASCII value at each position across all candidates
in C, removing the injected noise. Compared with
the black-box setting, this gray-box method can
recover p in a single pass, without repeated trials.
3.4
Formal Analysis
We model SPORE-G as a symmetric-key inspired
cryptographic formulation (Gui et al., 2023), which
we named Shadow Encryption. Following prior
work (Zhou et al., 2025), we define the token space
of LLM outputs as the decoded space (DS). We
define the space induced by top-k predictions as the
shadow space (SS). This corresponds to the set C
in Algorithm 1. The formulation defines a mapping
from DS to SS and then back to DS, as illustrated
in Figure 2. For the encryption process, we com-
pute a perturbed output p′ ←Enc(p, ω, θ) based
on noise ω. The key K = {ω, θ}. The perturbed
output p′ reduces the sensitivity of PII compared
with p. This transformation reduces exposure to the
defense mechanisms of LLM safety alignment. For
Decoded Space
Shadow Space
p


p
'p
Shadow 
Vector
Candidate 
Space
Recover
High Sensitivity
Low Sensitivity
Encryption
Efficient Gray-Box 
Decryption
PII
Perturbed PII
Attacker
Attacker
Figure 2: Overview of our shadow encryption paradigm,
which forms the core of SPORE. The method first ap-
plies encryption to reduce LLM sensitivity to PII. It then
leverages signals in the shadow space to enable efficient
recovery-based decryption.
the decryption process, we construct a candidate
space in SS by selecting multi-ranked tokens. We
then remove the noise ω to recover p. The decryp-
tion process is formulated as p ←Dec(p′, ω, θ).
A formal security analysis of this formulation
requires strong assumptions to ensure correct re-
covery of p. In this work, we focus on empirical
validation and do not pursue a formal theoretical
proof. This formulation can be extended to other
LLM security research, such as jailbreak (Shen
et al., 2024). In particular, the shadow encryption
mechanism can be inverted. Given response to-
kens, the noise variable ω can be estimated. This
inverse direction may enable additional security
applications in LLM systems.
In Appendix A, we further show that SPORE can
be combined with existing attack methods at differ-
ent stages of privacy extraction to form a stronger
attack pipeline.
3.5
Metrics
We adopt the following evaluation metrics to assess
the proposed SPORE algorithm and the baselines.
• Attack Success Rate (ASR). This metric mea-
sures the proportion of successful PII extractions
over all attack attempts. It is defined as the ratio
between the number of successful PII recoveries
and the total number of attacks.
• Expected Number of Queries (ENQ). For
SPORE-B, this metric measures the expected
number of attempts required to recover the target
user PII from partially leaked raw data.
4

0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Average Token Consumption (↓)
Claude Opus 4.6
GPT-5.4
GPT-5.4-mini
Qwen3.5-397B-A17B
Qwen3.6-Plus
896.99
828.94
826.54
888.94
876.87
160.01
101.35
112.69
166.31
115.98
386.71
128.61
100.80
168.58
175.81
ICA
MEXTRA
Spore (Ours)
Figure 3: Comparison of attack cost between SPORE
and prior methods.
• Token Consumption. We measure token con-
sumption as the total number of tokens used dur-
ing one complete attack execution. This includes
all prompt tokens and all output tokens.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Models. We select the frontier LLMs that are
widely recognized as the most robust in terms of
safety, based on existing SOTA research on safety
evaluation for LLMs (Ma et al., 2026; Fu et al.,
2026; Singh et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2026), includ-
ing Claude Opus 4.63, GPT-5.44, GPT-5.4-mini,
Qwen3.5-397B-A17B (Team, 2026) and Qwen3.6-
Plus (Qwen Team, 2026).
Datasets. We leverage the full TrustLLM dataset
(Huang et al., 2024) to construct realistic contexts
containing sensitive information. The TrustLLM
dataset comprises 560 privacy-related queries span-
ning diverse scenarios and seven categories of sen-
sitive information, including social security num-
bers, bank account numbers, driver license num-
bers, phone numbers, phone passwords, SSH keys,
and addresses (Wang et al., 2025b).
Baselines. Under black-box or gray-box assump-
tions, few existing approaches achieve both low
overhead and high attack success rate. We select
3https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-opus-4-6
4https://openai.com/zh-Hans-CN/index/introducing-gpt-
5-4
two representative and strong attack methods as
baselines, as described below.
• In-Context Attack (ICA). ICA (Wei et al., 2026)
constructs a small set of malicious in-context
demonstrations, referred to as shots, to steer the
conditional generation distribution toward a tar-
get harmful distribution. This mechanism en-
ables black-box jailbreak attacks. Empirical re-
sults show that with 20 shots, ICA achieves an
ASR above 80% on GPT-4. ICA does not require
gradient information or parameter access and out-
performs existing methods in average attack suc-
cess rate, making it one of the most effective
black-box jailbreak attacks. In our experiments,
we implement ICA with 20 shots for privacy ex-
traction as a baseline (Wang et al., 2025b).
• Memory EXTRaction Attack (MEXTRA).
MEXTRA (Wang et al., 2025a) is a privacy ex-
traction attack framework targeting the mem-
ory of LLM agents. By constructing attacking
prompts composed of a locator and an aligner,
it induces the agent to reveal private historical
records stored in its memory.
Evaluation on
the agent built on GPT-4o shows that MEXTRA
achieves a complete extracted rate of up to 87%.
For a fair comparison, we adopt the attack compo-
nents of MEXTRA for black-box models, which
explicitly request the model to retrieve memory
and prioritize it over the original task objective.
Evaluation. To reflect real-world adversarial set-
tings, all model inference is conducted through API
access. For the core experiments, we set temper-
ature to 1.0, and top_logprobs to 10. We set the
maximum number of tokens to 10,000 to prevent
truncation during inference. Considering realistic
attacker capability, we set λ = 20. For each black-
box attack, enumeration is limited to at most 20
attempts. We further evaluate different temperature
and top-k values in dedicated experiments. For sta-
tistical reporting, we compute the average expected
number of queries and token usage across multiple
runs. For attack success rate, we report pass@k
(Chen et al., 2021) to reflect realistic and practical
attack performance. The core prompts used to re-
produce the experimental results are provided in