TrEEStealer: Stealing Decision Trees via Enclave
Side Channels
Jonas Sander1, Anja Rabich1, Nick Mahling1, Felix Maurer1, Jonah Heller1,
Qifan Wang2, Thomas Eisenbarth1 and David Oswald2
1 University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, {j.sander,a.rabich,j.heller,thomas.
eisenbarth}@uni-luebeck.de,nick.mahling@protonmail.com,maurerfelix@protonmail.com
2 Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom,
{qifan.wang2,david.f.oswald}@durham.ac.uk
Abstract. Today, machine learning is widely applied in sensitive, security-related,
and financially lucrative applications. Model extraction attacks undermine current
business models where a model owner sells model access, e.g., via MLaaS APIs.
Additionally, stolen models can enable powerful white-box attacks, facilitating privacy
attacks on sensitive training data, and model evasion.
In this paper, we focus on Decision Trees (DT), which are widely deployed in practice.
Existing black-box extraction attacks for DTs are either query-intensive, make strong
assumptions about the DT structure, or rely on rich API information. To limit attacks
to the black-box setting, CPU vendors introduced Trusted Execution Environments
(TEE) that use hardware-mechanisms to isolate workloads from external parties, e.g.,
MLaaS providers. We introduce TrEEStealer, a high-fidelity extraction attack for
stealing TEE-protected DTs. TrEEStealer exploits TEE-specific side-channels to
steal DTs efficiently and without strong assumptions about the API output or DT
structure. The extraction efficacy stems from a novel algorithm that maximizes the
information derived from each query by coupling Control-Flow Information (CFI) with
passive information tracking. We use two primitives to acquire CFI: for AMD SEV,
we follow previous work using the SEV-Step framework and performance counters.
For Intel SGX, we reproduce prior findings on current Xeon 6 CPUs and construct a
new primitive to efficiently extract the branch history of inference runs through the
Branch-History-Register.
We found corresponding vulnerabilities in three popular libraries: OpenCV, mlpack,
and emlearn. We show that TrEEStealer achieves superior efficiency and extraction
fidelity compared to prior attacks. Our work establishes a new state-of-the-art for
DT extraction and confirms that TEEs fail to protect against control-flow leakage.
Keywords: Side Channel Attack · Decision Tree · Trusted Execution Environments
1
Introduction
Model extraction attacks undermine the confidentiality of Machine Learning (ML) models,
as they allow an attacker to extract models by repeatedly querying them in a black-box
manner using only the model’s outputs. While much of the literature [WYPY22,JCB+20,
LPLW24,TZJ+16,CCG+20] focuses on extracting neural networks, similar concerns apply
to popular models such as Decision Trees (DTs), which are widely deployed in practice,
e.g., in medical applications [CPL+25,RKM+25,JLH+25], credit risk prediction [DHHT22,
CSW+24] and intrusion detection [PBB+21]. Being able to extract DTs allows recovery
of feature value ranges along each path and tree structure, enabling downstream attacks
that can infer properties of the training data [SSSS17,FJR15]. Such leakage is undesirable
arXiv:2604.18716v1 [cs.CR] 20 Apr 2026

2
TrEEStealer: Stealing Decision Trees via Enclave Side Channels
Cloud-Service Provider
TEE
😊
User
🤑
Model / Data
Owner
😈
Model
thief
DT Inference
OS/HV
MLaaS
API
MLaaS
API
Figure 1: Attack scenario of TrEEStealer in which a model owner provides a proprietary
model protected through a TEE via a ML as a Service (MLaaS) API. The model thief
respects the threat model of the TEE and just controls the operating system respective
hypervisor, but still is able to steal whole real-world models precisely and efficiently.
as it may include sensitive information like medical records. Additionally, the models
themselves are seen as intellectual property that should be kept secret.
In order to protect the confidentiality of such deployed models, developers increasingly host
them in Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) on cloud infrastructure [OSF+16,LLP+20,
WCZ+22]. TEEs can protect individual processes (as Intel SGX) or entire Virtual Machines
(VMs) (as Intel TDX and AMD SEV). However, numerous works have demonstrated that
TEEs remain vulnerable to a broad range of side channels [MIE17,LSG+17,HMW+20,
ERAG+18,BPS18,MBH+20,WWRE24], which can ultimately break the confidentiality of
the protected DT. With these leakages, an attacker gains additional capabilities that can
significantly strengthen DT extraction attacks. Several prior works [TZJ+16,CCG+20,
OHA24, WSJ+25] examined the extraction of DT models, though they operate in the
general MLaaS setting and do not consider stronger scenarios where inference occurs inside
a TEE. Most of these [TZJ+16,CCG+20,OHA24] rely primarily on black-box access to
the model’s prediction interface and employ techniques such as identifying unique outputs,
active query synthesis, or explainable Artificial Intelligence (xAI). While applicable to
TEEs in principle, these extraction methods suffer from limitations: dependence on rich
output information, high query costs, and incomplete recovery of the tree structure. Our
evaluation shows that in real-world scenarios where such requirements are not satisfied,
their extracted tree models often perform poorly or not at all. Additionally, they often
recover only decision thresholds but miss repeated feature usage along a path, which
reflects the feature’s relative importance and can leak information about the underlying
training distribution. Wang et al. additionally recover duplicate feature usage within
each path [WSJ+25], but rely on precise fault injection during inference. Whether such
techniques remain viable for TEE-protected DT inference is unclear, as injecting controlled
faults at specific tree nodes is significantly more challenging within TEEs.
Contributions
Motivated by the absence of comprehensive security evaluations for TEE-
protected DT inference, we analyzed three popular DT inference libraries and found
side-channel vulnerabilities in each of them. We demonstrate their exploitability through
the introduction of TrEEStealer, a high-fidelity DT extraction attack. An overview of
our approach is shown in Figure 1. By using side-channel information from TEE execution
to infer the DT branches while querying the MLaaS API, TrEEStealer uses a novel
algorithm to construct a shadow model of the DT. We demonstrate the practicality of our
attack in case studies on two commercially available TEEs: Intel SGX and AMD SEV.
We release our implementation of TrEEStealer on GitHub1.
• To the best of our knowledge, TrEEStealer is the first attack that leverages
microarchitectural primitives to extract DTs in TEE-protected inference. We intro-
duce a new extraction algorithm with the lowest query complexity reported to date,
enabling full reconstruction of the tree, including all features, thresholds, duplicate
1 https://github.com/UzL-ITS/TrEEStealer

Jonas Sander, Anja Rabich, Nick Mahling, Felix Maurer, Jonah Heller, Qifan Wang,
Thomas Eisenbarth and David Oswald
3
feature usage along each path, and internal node ordering.
• We identify vulnerable implementations in three widely used DT inference libraries,
OpenCV, mlpack, and emlearn, which allow our attack to be mounted in realistic
deployment settings.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness and practicality of TrEEStealer for extracting
DTs from Intel SGX and AMD SEV. For SGX, we exploit information from the
Pattern History Register (PHR) to recover the branching behavior of the DT during
its execution. For AMD Secure Encrypted Virtualization (SEV), we reconstruct the
DT using a combination of a page-fault channel and reliable single-stepping.
2
Preliminaries
In the following, we introduce the preliminaries required to describe TrEEStealer’s
end-to-end attack approach. Table 1 reports the notations used in the explanation of
TrEEStealer’s attack logic.
2.1
Decision Trees
Table 1: Notations used in this paper. (⊥) and ([. . .]) means the variable is initialized
with bottom respective a list.
Notation
Description
Data
m
Number of features
S
Feature set S = [s0, s1, · · ·, sd−1]
X
Data sample X = [x0, x1, · · ·, xd−1]
Rl, Ru
Feature ranges R = [r0, r1, · · ·, rd−1] with lower rl
i and upper limit ru
i per feature si
(Shadow) Decision Tree Node
ϵ
Extraction resolution of node thresholds
V
Decision tree node V = Node(p, d, X, B)
V.p
Parent of the node
V.l
Left child of the node (⊥)
V.r
Right child of the node (⊥)
V.d
Depth of the node
V.f
Feature of the node (⊥)
V.t
Threshold of the node (⊥)
V.v
Value (label) if the node is a leaf (⊥)
V.X
Input that initially explored the node
V.B
Branching information[bi|bi ←0 if V.Xi led to left traversal, else bi ←1]
V.T0,
V.T1
Threshold ranges - Minimal respectively maximal values which resulted in a left (0)
respectively right (1) classification ([])
V.DD,
V.TT
Feature thresholds - Feature-indexed lists of lists of thresholds (TT) and
corresponding node depths (DD) of already confirmed thresholds on the path to
node V([l|l ←[] for i ←0, i < m, i ←i + 1], [l|l ←[] for i ←0, i < m, i ←i + 1])
(Shadow) Decision Tree Model
T
Decision Tree T = DT(r, I), ˜T for the shadow DT
T .r
Root node
˜T .I
Backlog of incomplete nodes
T (X)
Perform inference using DT T and input X
DTs are a class of supervised learning models widely used for classification and regression
tasks due to their interpretability, low computational cost, and robustness to heterogeneous
feature types. Without loss of generality, we consider DTs with a binary structure, meaning
each node has either a left and a right child or is a leaf node containing the final classification

4
TrEEStealer: Stealing Decision Trees via Enclave Side Channels
Root node
Inner node
Duplicated
feature
Decision/Internal node
Leaf node
Tree nodes
Data sample
Paths
to left child
to right child
Figure 2: Target DT with rectangles representing decision nodes (i.e., internal nodes).
The circles represent the leaves containing class labels (for classification) or numerical
predictions (for regression). The dashed line visualizes the inference process. Representative
nodes for explanation of the extraction process are highlighted.
or regression value (see also Figure 2 and Table 1). Additionally, each node has exactly one
parent, except for the root node, which has no parent. During the inference process, an
input X is processed starting in the root node. Each inner node checks one feature value
against a threshold value xi > V.t. If the check evaluates to true, the inference proceeds
along the left child and otherwise along the right child. The process terminates in a leaf
node and returns its classification or regression value. The structure of the DT, including
the threshold values, is determined in the corresponding training process.
2.2
Trusted Execution Environments
TEEs combine hardware-enforced isolation with Remote Attestation (RA), which allows
remote parties to verify the integrity of enclave code and makes TEEs particularly attractive
for confidential cloud computing such as MLaaS. TEEs can be used for applications (e.g.,
Intel Software Guard Extensions (SGX)) or for entire VMs (e.g., SEV). In this work, we
consider both SGX and SEV as our target scenarios, each utilizing different attack surfaces.
The following section provides an overview of them.
Intel SGX allows the hardware-supported isolation of applications in their own memory
regions called enclaves, which are encrypted in DRAM. This prevents access to the code
and data by the Operating System (OS) and HV, while also allowing the enclave to use
system resources, such as memory. The SGX Trusted Computing Base (TCB) assumes
that only the CPU supplied by Intel is trusted. When code is executed by the CPU, the
MMU will decrypt relevant code and data pages.
AMD SEV allows running confidential VM guests that are isolated from the hypervisor.
Pages belonging to SEV VMs are stored encrypted in the DRAM and decrypted by the
MMU. Each VM has its own encryption key, which is managed by the AMD Secure
Processor (PSP). SEV Encrypted State (SEV-ES) is an extension that introduces the VM
Save Area (VMSA), for encrypting the register states of the VM before storing them in
the VM Control Block (VMCB). Secure Nested Paging (SNP) further adds a shadow table
for storing the ownership of pages used by a guest, the Reverse Map Table (RMP). This
ensures memory integrity by preventing memory replay and re-mapping attacks by the
hypervisor. With SEV, we are referring to SNP unless explicitly stated otherwise.
2.3
Performance Counters
Hardware Performance Counters (HPC) allow for profiling applications based on events
and cycles. The exact supported events are vendor-specific and may vary based on the
exact CPU. HPCs are programmed and read using dedicated Model Specific Registers

Jonas Sander, Anja Rabich, Nick Mahling, Felix Maurer, Jonah Heller, Qifan Wang,
Thomas Eisenbarth and David Oswald
5
(MSRs). As they provide valuable information on executed code and data used, they can
also reveal sensitive information of workloads. Hence, they are not accessible to the host
OS for SGX unless the enclave is built as a debug enclave (our threat model does not
assume debug enclaves). However, SEV allows the hypervisor to access and configure a
guest TEE performance counter events up to Zen 5.
2.4
Conditional Branch Prediction
The Conditional Branch Predictor (CBP) minimizes pipeline stalls by predicting the
outcome of conditional branches (taken or not-taken) before their actual resolution. These
predictors have evolved from simple local designs to sophisticated TAgged GEometric
history length (TAGE) architectures that effectively mitigate aliasing effects [Sez07,MET23,
YTN+23].
Aliasing means two different branches modify the same entry in the so-
called Branch History Table resulting in decreased prediction performance. Modern Intel
processors implement a variant of the TAGE predictor, as demonstrated through reverse
engineering efforts. This implementation comprises two fundamental components: the
Pattern History Table (PHT), which maintains predictions for individual branches, and the
PHR, which captures the execution history of recent branches [YTN+23,MET23,YAC+24].
Pattern History Register. The PHR functions as a global shift register within each CPU
core, maintaining information from recently executed taken branches [MET23,YTN+23].
Branches that are not taken leave the PHR unchanged. The register operates using
2-bit units called doublets [YAC+24]. When a branch is taken, the PHR shifts by one
doublet and incorporates a footprint derived from both the branch address and its target
address through an XOR operation. With a capacity of 194 doublets, the PHR preserves
information from the last 194 taken branches.
Pattern History Table. Modern Intel processors implement the PHT as a table of 3-bit
saturating counters that are indexed during branch prediction [MET23]. Within the TAGE-
like predictor on Intel, multiple PHTs exist: a base table indexed exclusively by address
bits, and three tagged tables that incorporate the PHR to consider the execution history of
previous branches when predicting the current conditional branch. This design enhances
prediction accuracy for branches whose outcomes correlate with historical execution
patterns. For the tagged tables, the index calculation combines the 6th bit of the branch
address with a 7-bit sequence derived from folding portions of the PHR. Each of the three
tables uses progressively longer parts of the PHR. To reduce collisions of multiple branches,
the PHR has tags similar to CPU caches. These tags comprise the 13 least significant bits
of the branch address. When multiple PHTs yield valid predictions due to matching tags
across several tables, the predictor selects the prediction from the PHT that incorporates
the longest history [YTN+23].
2.5
TEE-based Side-Channels
Controlled-channel and Address Translation-based Attacks. Controlled-channel
attacks, a concept introduced by [XCP15], exploits the privileges of the OS to monitor
and manipulate page tables and thereby observe enclave memory-access patterns (see
also [SCNS16]). Although SGX enclaves protect code and data from a compromised OS,
the OS still controls virtual memory and can use page faults or page-table metadata to
infer program behaviour.
Interrupt-driven Attacks. Interrupt-driven frameworks provide fine-grained control over
enclave or VM execution. SGX-Step [BPS17] uses precise interrupt delivery (e.g., via APIC
timers) to implement deterministic single-stepping of enclave code, which enables detailed
monitoring of memory accesses over time and supports controlled-channel exploitation.
CopyCat combines the use of a page-fault controlled channel to track when the enclave

6
TrEEStealer: Stealing Decision Trees via Enclave Side Channels
accesses certain code and data pages and single-stepping to reconstruct the exact control-
flow path executed by the enclave [MBH+20]. In the VM setting, SEV-Step [WWRE24]
implements a similar single-stepping capability for SEV guests and exposes primitives for
page-fault tracking and cache attacks against SEV-protected VMs.
Branch-prediction Attacks. Branch-prediction attacks target the CPU’s prediction
structures to learn control-flow decisions of a victim. They include attacks on the branch
target buffer (BTB) [LSG+17, CCX+19], the pattern history table (PHT) [ERAG+18,
HMW+20], and the return stack buffer (RSB) [KKSAG18]. BTB-based techniques detect
whether a specific branch target has been trained by the victim. PHT-style attacks induce
collisions between attacker and victim branches to infer branch direction. RSB attacks
poison the return stack to trigger misspeculation and subsequent leakage.
3
TrEEStealer
In the following, we introduce the threat model and give a high-level overview of the attack
to finally introduce each component in detail.
3.1
Threat Model
We assume the attacker can query the DT model via standard MLaaS APIs, receiving
only minimal outputs (e.g., classification/regression results without confidence values).
Incomplete queries2 are disallowed, preventing direct leakage of internal node information.
The attacker aims to reconstruct the full DT structure (feature assignments and thresholds)
with minimal queries, without prior knowledge of the tree. However, they know feature
value ranges (commonly documented or derivable from semantics, e.g., human height less
than 5m). In addition, we assume the standard threat model for TEEs: for Intel SGX, the
attacker controls the OS (the enclave is not built in debug mode); for AMD SEV, they hold
hypervisor privileges. We emphasize that these are not specific assumptions of our work;
control over interrupts (enabling single-stepping) and access to microarchitectural state
(like the PHR) are established capabilities for such privileged attackers. Specifically, they
allow: (1) programming APIC timers for precise one-shot interrupts, and (2) manipulating
page tables to infer code execution locations at page granularity. The target model is
pretrained, and training details are outside our scope.
3.2
Attack Overview
From a high-level perspective, TrEEStealer consists of two modules: a target dependent
attack primitive and the attack logic. The attack primitive exploits side-channels of the
targeted TEE to extract branching information from the inference process. The attack
logic generates inputs to perform the inference and leverages the extracted branching
information to reconstruct the DT model under attack (see also Figure 3). The attack
performs the following basic steps:
1. The attack primitive gets an input from the attack logic.
2. The attack primitive sends the input via a MLaaS API to the target TEE running a
DT inference service.
3. The TEE starts the inference process and the attack primitive monitors the branching
decisions of the inference (left and right decisions in the DT structure).
4. The TEE sends the inference result via the MLaaS API back to the attack primitive.
5. Given the inference result and branching information the attack logic builds a shadow
version of the target model by iteratively adjusting the inputs to map features to nodes,
2 Supported by some MLaaS platforms (e.g., BigML), where leaving a feature unspecified causes traversal
to stop at a split on that feature, directly revealing its threshold.

Jonas Sander, Anja Rabich, Nick Mahling, Felix Maurer, Jonah Heller, Qifan Wang,
Thomas Eisenbarth and David Oswald
7
Attack Primitive
SEV-Step or SGX PHR
Shadow Tree
...
Attack Logic
TEE
DT inference
1. Input
or finish
5. Branch
info., result
2. Send input
4. Label
3. Execution leakage
Figure 3: Overview of TrEEStealer’s attack workflow.
find threshold values, and traverse all paths to extract the whole DT. While the shadow
DT is incomplete the attack logic returns to step 1 and sends the adjusted input to the
attack primitive, otherwise the attack logic terminates the attack by sending finish.
3.3
Attack Logic
Below, we note lists with bold capital letters, e.g., X and structs with calligraphic letters,
e.g., V. List elements and struct members are accessed via the (.)-operator and their
index respective member name. List. append(x) appends an element x to the end of the
list. List. last() returns and List. pop() removes and returns the last element of a list.
List. empty() returns ⊤if the list is empty and ⊥else. min(list) and max(list) return
the minimum respective maximum of a given list and len(list) the number of elements in
the list. Given two lists L and LL, with n = min(len(L), len(LL)) zip(L, LL) returns an
iterator of tuples (L.0, LL.0), (L.1, LL.1), . . . , (L.n, LL.n). Structs and lists are passed as