Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for
Classical Verifiers
Ameer Mohammed∗
ameer.mohammed@ku.edu.kw
Kuwait University
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Aydin Abadi∗
aydin.abadi@ncl.ac.uk
Newcastle University
Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom
Jaffer Mahdi∗
jaffer.mahdi@ku.edu.kw
Kuwait Oil Company
Kuwait City, Kuwait
Abstract
Publicly verifiable delegation is a well-known problem involving a
user who wishes to outsource a resource-intensive computational
task to a more powerful but potentially untrusted server such that
any other party is able to efficiently check the veracity of the com-
putation’s result. This problem has been extensively studied in the
classical domain where the user and server are both non-quantum
machines. However, the problem becomes more challenging when
the classical user wants to delegate a quantum circuit to a single
prover with quantum-computing capabilities. Previous solutions
have resorted to using impractical or non-standard cryptographic
solutions (e.g. indistinguishability obfuscation) to achieve this re-
quirement. In this work, we relax the requirement to have time-
delayed publicly verifiable proofs, where the verification key is
made known to the public only when the computation (and its
proof) are guaranteed to have been completed. We propose a prac-
tical non-interactive scheme leveraging commitment schemes and
time-lock puzzles, which can be efficiently realized through well-
established and standard post-quantum assumptions. The main
idea of our technique lies in using time-lock puzzles to compile a
2-round privately verifiable scheme into a non-interactive publicly
verifiable scheme with timestamped proofs, outsourcing not only
the quantum computation but the puzzle solving as well. Security
is proven in the quantum random oracle model with a common
reference string (CRS).
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy →Cryptography; Security services.
Keywords
Verifiable Computation, Publicly Verifiable, Time-lock Puzzles, Post-
Quantum Security
ACM Reference Format:
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi. 2026. Time-Delayed
Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers. In Pro-
ceedings of Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’26).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1
Introduction
An important problem when outsourcing a client’s computation
to a more capable server is ensuring that the result that is com-
puted and returned by the server is correct and efficiently verifiable
by the client. In particular, the verification complexity should be
much lower than that required to run the actual computation. This
problem has been well studied when the server and client are both
non-quantum machines, and, in fact, can be realized through the use
of succinct arguments for NP [61, 74]. With quantum computing
on the horizon and likely to be offered initially as a pay-per-use ser-
vice by major companies, it is vital to prepare for a scenario where
users with classical computers want to delegate complex computa-
tions to powerful quantum servers and efficiently verify the results
produced by the servers– a task now known in the literature as
Classical Verification of Quantum Computation (CVQC).
In the breakthrough work of Mahadev [67], it was demonstrated
that such a scheme does indeed exist assuming the post-quantum
hardness of Learning With Errors (LWE). This was further extended
[28, 11] to add succinctness, in which the verifier’s time complexity
is poly(log𝑇) where𝑇is the time to execute the delegated quantum
computation. In addition, while the original protocol consisted of
4 rounds of communication, this was reduced to 2 rounds or less
(1 round with setup) while still preserving negligible soundness
through parallel repetition [28, 7, 11].
More relevant to this work, some applications demand public
verifiability, an additional property allowing anyone (not just the
delegator) to verify the result of the computation.
The usual desired setting of publicly verifiable non-interactive
verifiable computation involves a prover who wishes to publish
a single-message proof convincing any verifier that 𝐶(𝑥) = 𝑦for
some program or circuit 𝐶over input 𝑥. To avoid triviality in the
fully classical setting, the proof needs to be relatively “short” such
that verification is faster than re-executing 𝐶(𝑥) and checking the
result, otherwise the verifier has no need to delegate and can instead
perform the computation itself. The proof size requirement, while
preferred, is not highly prioritized when the prover is quantum,
as 𝐶is not necessarily efficiently computable by the verifier. The
standard go-to approach to solve this problem is by using succinct
non-interactive arguments (SNARGs) for NP (or even P), which can
be realized from LWE [29]. However, our delegated computation is
quantum, and thus one needs a SNARG for BQP for this approach to
work. The work of Bartusek and Malavolta [13] provides one means
to achieve this goal, and, in fact, they obtain SNARGs for QMA,
the quantum analogue of NP, (and hence BQP) which would imply
publicly verifiable CVQC. Their results rely on quantum null-iO,
which is derived from non-standard cryptographic primitives, e.g.,
arXiv:2604.23516v1 [cs.CR] 26 Apr 2026

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi
VBB obfuscation. In contrast, our goal is to prioritize practicality
over theoretical feasibility, and therefore, we wish to avoid such
strong assumptions.
Ideally, we would like to base the scheme on falsifiable assump-
tions [79, 39], which are those that can be tested in a security
game against an efficient challenger. Examples include one-way
functions, trapdoor permutations, DDH, and LWE. Notably, indis-
tinguishability obfuscation is not falsifiable [52]. Roughly speaking,
such assumptions are often preferred, as they can be efficiently
proven/refuted and therefore instill more confidence when used
as building blocks for more advanced schemes. The very recent
related work of Bartusek et al. [10] comes close to achieving this
by showing a publicly verifiable CVQC that is based on LWE but
they do so under the classical oracle model [12], which idealizes the
notion of obfuscation for classical circuits and can be heuristically
instantiated with iO.
1.1
Our Result
We seek to make progress toward addressing the following question:
Does a publicly verifiable delegation protocol for quantum
computation with a classical verifier exist under falsifiable
assumptions in the random oracle model?
We answer the question affirmatively with a minor adjustment to
the standard publicly verifiable computation setting. Unlike stan-
dard publicly verifiable computation, where the verification key is
available from the outset, our scheme delays the release of this ca-
pability. Specifically, public verifiability is enabled only after a time
delay Δ, where Δ > 𝑂(𝑇), and only for proofs generated before
time Δ. Until that point in time, the scheme operates in a privately
verifiable mode.
Theorem 1.1 (informal). Under the post-quantum LWE assump-
tion, there exists a non-interactive time-delayed publicly verifiable
CVQC protocol for problems in BQP with computational soundness
in the common reference string (CRS) and quantum random oracle
model (QROM).
A scheme in the common reference string (CRS) model, as op-
posed to the plain model, would allow all parties to have access to a
string that was honestly generated by some trusted setup algorithm.
We note that the CRS is not uniformly random but is deliberately
structured, so we cannot simply replace the need for a CRS with
an output of the random oracle.
Our technique of employing time-lock puzzles to render a CVQC
protocol publicly verifiable is also of independent interest. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first instance in which time-
lock puzzles are used to transform a designated-verifier verifiable
quantum computation scheme into a publicly verifiable one.
We expect that this technique can be generalized to compile
any privately verifiable computation scheme into a time-delayed,
publicly verifiable one, even in the classical (non-quantum) setting.
However, since standard publicly verifiable delegation schemes
based on falsifiable assumptions already exist in the classical set-
ting [56, 41], this generalization is more impactful and meaningful
in the classical-verifier quantum-prover setting. We expect that the
time-delayed publicly verifiable scheme offers greater efficiency in
scenarios where lightweight alternatives to SNARGs are preferred.
We implemented an instantiation of our scheme for two com-
putational tasks on AWS Braket, which is a cloud-based quantum
simulation platform. We tested our scheme on random quantum
circuits and Harrow–Hassidim–Lloyd (HHL) circuits [46, 93], and
estimated their concrete running time. The latter was selected as
one potential candidate circuit that a client may delegate to take
advantage of the quantum speedup and solve linear systems ex-
ponentially faster than classical algorithms. In assessing concrete
running times for a 16×16 HHL instance, we found that circuit com-
putation by the quantum prover took 90 seconds (which is also the
time it should take at least to solve the corresponding puzzle) while
puzzle generation on the classical client side required only 0.05 ms.
1.2
Motivation and Applications
Quantum computers promise significant speedups over classical
machines for a wide range of tasks. However, due to their high cost
and limited availability, they are expected to be initially accessed via
cloud-based, pay-per-use services. In such a model, clients (often
classical and resource-limited) need to outsource their quantum
computations to powerful remote quantum servers. This delegation
model introduces the critical challenge of trust:
How can a classical client be sure that the result provided by a
remote quantum server is correct?
Verifiable delegation schemes aim to solve this by enabling the
client to efficiently verify the correctness of the quantum result
without redoing the computation themselves. In many real-world
scenarios, it is not enough for only the original client to verify
the result of a delegated quantum computation; instead, the result
should be publicly verifiable. For instance, public verifiability be-
comes essential when (a) the client is offline or resource-constrained,
or (b) dispute resolution is needed and third parties (e.g., courts,
auditors, or regulatory bodies) must confirm correctness. In partic-
ular, in commercial settings such as quantum cloud services, public
verifiability strengthens accountability and helps prevent spuri-
ous disputes: customers and auditors can independently validate
reported outputs, and providers are protected against false accusa-
tions of misbehavior. More broadly, these deployment requirements
(offline or resource-constrained clients, dispute resolution, and ex-
ternal auditability) motivate publicly verifiable CVQC. At the same
time, achieving public verifiability is nontrivial because existing
CVQC protocols are typically designated-verifier and rely on secret
verification keys; Section 1.3 discusses why naive “publish-the-key”
strategies fail. Publicly verifiable CVQC is therefore particularly
relevant in high-stakes domains where outputs affect consequential
decisions and post-hoc auditability is required, for example:
• Drug Discovery: Quantum algorithms like Quantum Approxi-
mate Optimization Algorithm and Variational Quantum Eigen-
solver can simulate complex molecular interactions and predict
protein folding patterns more efficiently than classical meth-
ods. This not only accelerates the drug discovery process but
also deepens our understanding of protein misfolding diseases,
including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s [35, 57].
• Genomics and Personalized Medicine: Quantum computing has
the potential to transform genomics and personalized medicine
by facilitating the analysis of complex genetic interactions on a
scale beyond the reach of classical computers [30, 83].

Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
• Portfolio Optimization and Risk Modeling: Quantum algorithms
can solve complex optimization problems inherent in portfolio
management, enabling better asset allocation and risk assess-
ment [92]. For instance, the Harrow-Hassidim-Lloyd algorithm
can be employed for such purposes [45].
• Quantum-Enhanced Classification: Quantum machine learning
models such as Quantum Support Vector Machines and Varia-
tional Quantum Classifiers can substantially improve data clas-
sification [48]. These models have shown promise in fields like
fraud detection and medical diagnosis by offering potential com-
putational advantages over classical classifiers [51, 71].
1.3
Naive Approaches
One might wonder why the client cannot use a privately verifiable
scheme and publish the secret key in the clear alongside the circuit
to enable third-party verification. Publishing the key undermines
security: once it becomes public, a malicious prover can forge proofs
that pass verification. Even if the client privately shares the key with
a select set of verifiers, verification remains non-public, because
only those parties can check the result. Worse yet, if any verifier
leaks the secret to the quantum server, the server could generate
convincing but invalid proofs, completely breaking soundness.
Alternatively, if the client were allowed to send a second mes-
sage, it could keep the secret verification key private until the server
returns the result and proof, and then publish the key so that any-
one can verify. In our setting, this “publish-later” strategy is not
available: it requires either (i) continued client availability to issue
a second release message, or (ii) a trusted escrow that stores the
key and releases it at the appropriate time. We assume neither, the
client may go offline immediately after its first-round message, and
we do not rely on any trusted party for timed key release. Conse-
quently, delayed public verification must embed the key material in
the client’s initial message in a way that prevents recovery before
the prescribed time and lets any party later recover the same key
fixed at setup and check its consistency with the public parameters.
1.4
Technical Overview
Before presenting the high-level technical ideas behind our ap-
proach, we first highlight the core challenges by examining several
strawman solutions which may at first glance appear viable but
ultimately fail to address our goals.
1.4.1
Initial Attempts. As previously mentioned, SNARGs for BQP
are the best candidate for solving this problem. However, their
construction currently relies on very strong assumptions [13]. One
might consider adopting an approach similar to [28] (in the CRS
model) where a fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) of the private
verification key is sent by the client to third parties where they
will, in turn, run a (publicly executable) FHE evaluation of the
verification procedure over the ciphertext to output an encrypted
result of the verification. However, the third-party verifier will not
be able to decrypt the prover’s homomorphically evaluated result,
as they do not possess the FHE secret key.
To avoid dealing with encrypted results, a somewhat related
attempt is to use functional or even attribute-based encryption
(ABE) as proposed in [80] where a delegated Boolean circuit 𝐶is
represented as a functional secret key 𝑠𝑘𝐶, the input 𝑥to the circuit
is represented as an attribute on a ciphertext 𝑐𝑥of a randomly
encrypted message, and computing the result consists of decrypting
𝑐𝑥using 𝑠𝑘𝐶to get 𝐶(𝑥). That said, because 𝐶is a quantum circuit,
we need ABE for circuits 𝐶in BQP, which again is only known
to be achievable from iO [13]. Alternatively, we can try to let the
functional secret key be 𝑠𝑘𝑉𝑣𝑘(.) where 𝑉is the classical verifier
circuit with the private verification key hardcoded. For this, we need
some form of public-key function-private ABE, which is known to
be restricted to a limited class of functions, e.g., point functions or
inner products [24].
To circumvent the apparent lack of sufficiently expressive prim-
itives from standard assumptions, we elected to relax the public
verifiability requirement to be active only after the computation
and its proof are released. This intuition leads us towards using
time-based cryptography as a means to delay verifiability for the
benefit of basing our scheme on sturdier assumptions.
1.4.2
Our Approach. At a high level, the core idea behind our
protocol is to transform an efficient, privately verifiable CVQC
scheme into a publicly verifiable one by encapsulating the private
verification key within a time-lock puzzle, a cryptographic time
capsule. The verification key is released only after the delegated
computation is completed. The steps are illustrated in Figure 1,
which we describe in more detail here.
The privately verifiable protocol that we start with relies on the
measurement protocol of Mahadev [67] which generates a secret
trapdoor (of a trapdoor injective claw-free function, TCF) for use
during the verification. We require the client, during the setup, to
encode the secret trapdoor used for the verification in a time-lock
puzzle and publish it as part of the public parameters of the scheme.
The client publishes the public parameters along with the puz-
zle. The server performs the delegated computation and publishes
the result along with a proof asserting the computation has been
performed correctly. Later, the server finds the solution to the puz-
zle and publishes the solution too. The puzzle’s difficulty is set
such that the server cannot find its solution before performing the
computation and generating the proof. Thus, if 𝐶(𝑥) takes time
𝑇to complete and prove, we set the puzzle to be solved in time
Δ > Ω(𝑇). Given the computation result, proof, and the trapdoor,
any verifier can check the solution’s validity. Since the server has
already computed the result and published it, the knowledge of the
trapdoor that it finds later will not help it to cheat and create a
proof for a false statement.
Furthermore, the server cannot wait until after solving the puzzle
and then publish a forged proof, because the proof must carry a
verifiable timestamp 𝜏, and verification rejects unless 𝜏is smaller
than the deadline. The verifiers do not need to monitor the server;
they only check the timestamp embedded in the proof against the
public deadline.
However, we still need to make sure the verifiers are given the
original trapdoor, otherwise the server might be able to provide an
alternative trapdoor for an invalid computation result but still con-
vince the verifiers to accept the proof. To satisfy this requirement,
we use the following efficient technique, introduced in [3]. When
the client generates the time-lock puzzle for the trapdoor, it gener-
ates a commitment to this trapdoor and publishes the commitment

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi
Figure 1: A simplified diagram illustrating the high-level
structure of the post-quantum PV-CVQC protocol using time-
lock puzzles and commitments.
as part of the public parameters. During the generation of the time-
lock puzzle, the client concatenates the plaintext trapdoor with the
fixed-length random value used for the commitment and generates
the puzzle for this plaintext, i.e., the concatenation. In this setting,
when the server solves the puzzle, it parses the solution into two
parts: the trapdoor and the randomness (which are the opening of
the commitment) and publishes them. Using the opening, a veri-
fier initially checks whether they match the public commitment
and if the verification passes, then the verifier uses the trapdoor
to check the correctness of the computation’s result. To ensure
that the time-lock puzzle cannot be solved by the quantum prover
faster than intended, it must be based on a post-quantum hardness
assumption. Since TCF was shown to be realized under the LWE
or Ring-LWE assumptions [22, 23], which is secure against poly-
time quantum adversaries, we can rely on the same assumptions to
realize a time-lock puzzle primitive as recently shown in [62, 5].
To summarize, informally, the protocol steps are as follows:
(1) The client, who wants to delegate a circuit 𝐶on input 𝑥,
generates the public 𝑝𝑘and private 𝑠𝑘parameters of the
underlying privately verifiable CVQC scheme.
(2) It publishes a time-lock puzzle 𝑜and a commitment 𝑑of the
private trapdoor alongside the circuit to be delegated.
(3) The server runs the CVQC prover’s algorithm on the dele-
gated computation𝐶(𝑥). It publishes the computation output
along with the associated proof of correctness. Concurrently,
the server may start solving the puzzle 𝑜.
(4) Once the puzzle solution, representing the now-public trap-
door, is recovered, the server publishes it to all verifiers.
(5) The verifier, now having access to the CVQC trapdoor ver-
ification key, can check the validity of the puzzle solution
against the commitment𝑑, and if it passes, initiates the CVQC
verification algorithm to either accept or reject the proof.
We elaborate on each of these steps and the implementation of each
algorithm more formally in Section 4.
2
Related Work
This section covers previous work in verifiable quantum computa-
tion and public delegation as well as techniques from timed cryp-
tography that are adjacent to our work. Although there have been
several works addressing the verifiable quantum computation prob-
lem, we will focus mainly on the setting of a single classical verifier
and single quantum prover, the most notable of which are listed in
Table 1.
2.1
Verification of Quantum Computation
Approaches used for quantum computation verification can be
categorised according to the model of computation that parties are
assumed to possess within a particular setting and whether certain
computational assumptions are made. If the verifier is imbued with
some lightweight quantum capabilities (e.g., measurement), then
various solutions exist in this setting [14, 38, 77, 76, 88, 58]. There
are also methods in which the verifier is kept classical, but the
protocol requires two or more entangled provers [55, 42, 32]. While
these protocols can be shown to have information-theoretic security,
having multiple entangled and non-communicating provers is often
practically prohibitive.
Borrowing from ideas in computational security, a recent promis-
ing line of work, initiated by Mahadev [67], deviates from the above
approaches by making additional computational assumptions to
obtain verifiable delegation in a setting where the verifier is an effi-
cient classical machine interacting with a single (computationally
bounded) prover. This was the first such interactive protocol in this
setting, verifying the result of a quantum computation using four
rounds of communication. This protocol was proven to be sound
under the learning with errors (LWE) assumption [85], which is
assumed to be intractable for polynomial-time quantum machines.
Subsequent works [28, 7] reduced the number of rounds to 2 (or
one round with setup) in the quantum random oracle model, and
in fact, we use these as a basis for our protocol.
Gheorghiu and Vidick [40] propose a composable protocol that
allows a verifier to delegate to a prover the preparation of certain
single-qubit quantum states. The composability feature of the pro-
tocol allows it to be securely combined with other protocols. The
protocol, in a preprocessing phase, requires several rounds of com-
munication that depend on the circuit size. It also relies on LWE.
Chung et al. [31] propose a generic compiler that transforms any
CVQC protocol to a blind one while preserving the original proto-
col’s round complexity. It relies on quantum fully homomorphic
encryption schemes and quantum-secure LWE.
Delegation protocols can also have the property of blindness
where the prover is guaranteed to learn nothing about the circuit
being delegated (apart from its size). However, impossibility results
have been established for information-theoretically secure blind
delegation of quantum computation to classical verifiers [1].
All of the aforementioned protocols are in the designated verifier
model where the verifier needs to possess some secret information
for verification; if the prover gains access to this secret then it can
convince a verifier about an invalid proof. As a result, they are not
publicly verifiable.

Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Protocol
Round
Complexity
Succinct
Blind
Publicly
Verifiable
Assumptions
Model
Mahadev [67]
4
No
No
No
LWE
Plain
Gheorghiu and Vidick [40]
𝑂(|𝐶|)
No
Yes
No
LWE
Plain
Chia et al. [28]
2
Yes
No
No
LWE + iO
QROM+CRS
Alagic et al. [7]
1 (w/setup)
No
No
No
LWE
QROM
Zhang [94]
𝑂(𝜆)
Yes (𝑂(|𝐶|))
No
No
LWE
QROM
Bartusek and Malavolta [13]
1
Yes
No
Yes
LWE + iO
QROM + CRS
Metger et al. [73] and Gunn et al. [44]
𝑂(1)
Yes
No
No
LWE
Plain
Bartusek et al. [12, 10]
1
Yes
Yes
Yes
LWE
Classical Oracle Model
This work
1 (w/setup)
No
No
Yes
SIS/LWE variants
QROM + CRS
Table 1: The existing CVQC schemes in the single verifier, single prover setting and their properties. Succinctness refers to the
property that verification time is poly(𝜆, log𝑑(𝐶)) where 𝜆is the security parameter and 𝑑(𝐶) is the depth of the delegated circuit
𝐶. Blindness refers to keeping the computation hidden from the prover. All computational assumptions are post-quantum.
2.2
Publicly Verifiable Delegation
Publicly verifiable delegation has long been studied for the setting
where the verifier and prover are both classical machines. This is
reflected in the long line of work that proposes various schemes
under standard [56] and non-standard or idealized (e.g., Random
Oracle Model) assumptions [16, 15]. Commonly used methods for
achieving publicly verifiable proof systems involve the application
of the Fiat-Shamir heuristic [36] to convert a public-coin interactive
proof system (e.g. sigma protocols) into a non-interactive one [63,
27, 25] or rely on trusted setup assumptions [43, 17, 81] such as
common reference strings (CRS). Such techniques generally give
rise to non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs (NIZKs) and succinct
non-interactive arguments of knowledge (SNARKs) with the public
verifiability property.
In the quantum setting, several constructions of NIZKs for QMA
have been proposed under different settings and/or assumptions.
The works of [33, 78] construct NIZK for QMA with quantum
pre-processing in the designated-verifier model where the proof is
classically verifiable but the verifier needs to generate a quantum
message as its first message. In addition, several constructions were
proposed under the malicious designated verifier (MDV) model [87,
9] where the trusted setup generates a reusable common random
string but any verifier, given the CRS, needs to generate its own
classical public-secret key pair where the secret key is used for its
own private (designated) verification. All of the above protocols
require some form of secret parameters for verification and are
therefore not publicly verifiable.
Previous work on publicly verifiable quantum computation re-
lied on the verifier having some form of quantum capability [49,
65]. In the CVQC setting, a recent line of work [13, 12, 10] focuses
on achieving public verifiability based on (post-quantum) indistin-
guishability obfuscation (iO) for classical circuits or under the clas-
sical oracle model, which idealizes obfuscation for classical circuits.
Our work aims to eliminate the (strong) iO requirement. While
follow-ups to this work [73, 44] did achieve succinct arguments
for QMAby forgoing iO and relying only on (post-quantum) LWE
only, their schemes are interactive with constant round complexity,
while we wish to keep the communication non-interactive.
2.3
Time-Based Cryptography
2.3.1
Time-Lock Puzzle. Timothy May [72] initially put forth the
idea of sending information to the future. A basic property of a
time-lock scheme is that generating a puzzle takes less time than
solving it. The scheme that Timothy May proposed used a trusted
agent that releases a secret on time for a puzzle to be solved. Since
relying on a trusted agent can be a strong assumption, Rivest et al.
[86] proposed an RSA-based TLP. This scheme does not require a
trusted agent, relies on sequential squaring, and is secure against
a receiver who may have many computational resources that run
in parallel with the goal of finding the solution faster. Since the
introduction of the RSA-based TLP, different variants of it have
been proposed, including post-quantum TLPs [62, 5] and homo-
morphic TLPs, e.g., in [70]. Malavolta and Thyagarajan et al. [70]
proposed the notion of homomorphic TLPs, which allows an arbi-
trary function to run over puzzles of different clients before they
are solved. The schemes use the RSA-based TLP and fully homo-
morphic encryption. Furthermore, to achieve efficiency, partially
homomorphic TLPs have also been proposed, including those that
support homomorphic linear combinations of puzzles [70, 66].
2.3.2
Verifiable Delay Function (VDF). A VDF enables a prover to
provide a publicly verifiable proof stating that it has performed
a pre-determined number of sequential computations [18, 90, 19,
82]. VDF was first formalized by Boneh et al [18]. They proposed
several VDF constructions based on SNARKs along with either
incrementally verifiable computation or injective polynomials, or
based on time-lock puzzles, where the SNARKs-based approaches
require a trusted setup. Later, Wesolowski [90] and Pietrzak [82]
concurrently improved the previous VDFs from different perspec-
tives and proposed schemes based on sequential squaring. They
also support efficient verification. Most VDFs have been built upon
TLPs. Nevertheless, the converse is not necessarily the case because
VDFs are not suitable to encapsulate an arbitrary private message
since they take a public message as input, whereas TLPs have been
designed to conceal a private input message.
2.3.3
Timed Commitment. A timed commitment is a commitment
scheme that includes an optional forced opening phase, enabling the
receiver to recover the committed value without the committer’s
cooperation—provided the receiver invests sufficient computational
effort and time [21, 4, 59]. This property is particularly useful in

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi
scenarios where the sender refuses to voluntarily open the commit-
ment. In our solution, a timed commitment can be employed as a
black-box component to unify the time-lock puzzle and commit-
ment schemes, albeit at the expense of efficiency. This is because, in
our scheme, the client is assumed to be honest and therefore does
not need to prove (e.g., via zero-knowledge proofs or related tech-
niques) that the puzzles have been generated correctly, an assurance
that is typically required in timed commitment schemes. Therefore,
we adopt an efficient technique proposed in [3], which combines a
time-lock puzzle with a commitment scheme, enabling the server to
efficiently prove that it has recovered the correct solution originally
embedded by the client within the puzzle.
2.3.4
Timed Signatures and Proofs. Researchers have proposed
the timed version of digital signatures [2]. They formally defined
such a notion in the universally composable (UC) framework [26]
and proposed a protocol to realize this concept by mainly relying
on a blockchain and standard digital signature scheme. Arun et
al. [8] proposed the notion of short-lived zero-knowledge proofs
and signatures, which consider the case that after a certain time
period the proofs or signatures will be invalid/forgeable. The main
idea behind the aforementioned notion is to allow any party to
forge any proof by executing a large sequential computation; the
proposed schemes primarily rely on VDFs. This differs from our
setting where instead of eventual deniability, we are concerned
with eventual public verifiability. To enable a smart contract to
efficiently verify a proof in a “proofs of data retrievability” system,
researchers combined a message authentication code (MAC) with an
RSA-based TLP. The MAC verification key is embedded in the TLP
and provided to the smart contract after the proof is registered [3].
3
Preliminaries
In this section, we present the background and necessary material
for the models, primitives, and protocols used to build our scheme.
3.1
Notation
We say that a function 𝑓: N →[0, 1] is negligible if, for any poly-
nomial 𝑝(.) and sufficiently large 𝑛∈N, we have 𝑓(𝑛) < 1/𝑝(𝑛).
We denote F (𝑋,𝑌) to be the set of all functions with domain 𝑋
and range 𝑌. Given two interactive algorithms 𝑃and 𝑉, we denote
𝑦
$←−⟨𝑃(𝑤),𝑉(𝑧)⟩(𝑥) as the random variable representing the inter-
action between 𝑃(with private input 𝑤) and 𝑉(with private input
𝑧) on common input 𝑥where 𝑦is 𝑉’s local output.
We say that a classical algorithm 𝐴(𝑥) is efficient or probabilis-
tic polynomial time (PPT) if it runs in time poly(|𝑥|). Similarly, a
quantum algorithm 𝑄(|𝑥⟩) is said to be a quantum polynomial time
(QPT) machine if it runs in time poly(|𝑥|) where |𝑥⟩is a state in
some Hilbert space H. For any given circuit 𝐶, we denote |𝐶| to
be the size of the circuit and 𝑑𝑒𝑝𝑡ℎ(𝐶) to be its depth. We denote
BQP to be the set of languages decidable by a QPT machine and
QMA to be the set of all languages 𝐿where 𝐿∈QMA if, for every
𝑥∈𝐿, there exists a polynomial-sized quantum state (a witness)
that makes a QPT machine accept 𝑥with high probability (and
rejects otherwise). For any two distributions 𝑋and 𝑌, we denote
𝑋c≈𝑌whenever 𝑋and 𝑌are computationally indistinguishable
and 𝑋s≈𝑌to mean that 𝑋and 𝑌are statistically close. Through-
out our work, we refer to the Quantum Random Oracle Model [20]
(QROM) as an idealized model that allows adversaries to have black-
box access to a quantum analogue of the classical random oracle
that can input/output quantum states.
3.2
Time-Lock Puzzles
In this section, we restate the definition of a time-lock puzzle
(TLP) [86].
Definition 3.1. A TLP scheme consists of three algorithms: TLP =
(TLP.Setup, TLP.GenPuzzle, TLP.Solve) defined as follows:
• TLP.Setup(1𝜆, Δ) →(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘). A probabilistic algorithm that
takes as input a security parameter, 1𝜆, and time parameter
Δ that specifies how long a message must remain hidden in
seconds. It outputs a pair (𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘) that contains the scheme’s
public and private parameters, respectively.
• TLP.GenPuzzle(𝑚,𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘) →𝑜. A probabilistic algorithm that
takes as input a solution 𝑚and (𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘). It outputs a puzzle 𝑜.
• TLP.Solve(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑜) →𝑠. A deterministic algorithm that takes as
input 𝑡𝑝𝑘and 𝑜. It outputs a solution 𝑠.
The following properties must also be satisfied:
• Completeness. For any message 𝑚it always holds that:
TLP.Solve(𝑡𝑝𝑘, TLP.GenPuzzle(𝑚,𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘)) = 𝑚
• Efficiency. The run-time of TLP.Solve(𝑝𝑘,𝑜) is upper-bounded
by 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(Δ, 𝜆).
In certain schemes, such as [5], the secret key 𝑡𝑠𝑘may not be
needed. The security of a TLP requires that the puzzle’s solution
remains confidential against all adversaries running in parallel
within the time period, Δ. It also requires that an adversary cannot
extract a solution in time 𝛿(Δ) < Δ, using a polynomial number
of processors 𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦′(Δ) processors that run in parallel and after a
large amount of pre-computation.
Definition 3.2. A TLP is secure if for all 𝜆and Δ, all quantum
polynomial time (QPT) adversaries 𝐴:= (𝐴1,𝐴2) where 𝐴1 runs
in total time 𝑂(𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑦(Δ, 𝜆)) and 𝐴2 runs in parallel time 𝛿(Δ) <
Δ using at most 𝑝(Δ) = poly(Δ) parallel processors, there is a
negligible function negl(𝜆), such that:
Pr

(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘) ←TLP.Setup(1𝜆, Δ)
(𝑚0,𝑚1, state) ←𝐴1(1𝜆,𝑡𝑝𝑘, Δ)
𝑏
$←{0, 1}
𝑜←TLP.GenPuzzle(𝑚𝑏,𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘)
𝑏←𝐴2(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑜, state)

≤1
2 + negl(𝜆)
In the literature of TLP, the security definition includes two
adversaries 𝐴1 and 𝐴2 because they have different run-time con-
straints. In this work, we use the same approach.
3.2.1
Post Quantum Secure TLPs. Lai and Malavolta [62] proposed
a candidate post-quantum secure sequential function relying on
a lattice-based hash function [69]. Using the proposed sequential
squaring, it is possible to easily construct a TLP. However, this TLP
will require the puzzle generator to take as many steps as the puzzle
solver. Very recently, Shweta et al. [5] proposed a TLP based on

Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
lattices that can be instantiated using the SIS-sequential function of
[62] (with judicious parameter settings). In this scheme, the puzzle
generator can create puzzles more quickly than the solver can solve
them. Our scheme can leverage any post-quantum secure TLP in a
black-box manner.
Lemma 3.3 ([5]). Assuming the quantum hardness of circular
small-secret LWE [50], there exists a time-lock puzzle that is secure
against polynomial-time quantum adversaries.
3.3
Commitment Scheme
There are two parties involved in a commitment scheme, a sender
and a receiver. The commitment scheme has two phases, commit
and open. In the commit phase, the sender commits to a message 𝑚
as Com(𝑚,𝑟) = 𝑐𝑜𝑚, that involves a secret value,𝑟. In the open phase,
the sender sends the opening ˆ𝑚:= (𝑚,𝑟) to the receiver which
verifies its correctness: Ver(𝑐𝑜𝑚, ˆ𝑚)
?= 1 and accepts if the output
is 1. A commitment scheme must satisfy (a) hiding, it is infeasible
for an adversary (i.e., the receiver) to learn any information about
the committed message 𝑚, until the commitment 𝑐𝑜𝑚is opened,
and (b) binding, it is infeasible for an adversary (i.e., the sender)
to open a commitment 𝑐𝑜𝑚to different values ˆ𝑚′ := (𝑚′,𝑟′) than
that was used in the commit phase, i.e., in

[…middle truncated for length…]

ess properties of Definition 4. Com-
pleteness follows from the underlying 2-round CVQC protocol, the
time-lock puzzle, and the commitment scheme. Specifically, for any
𝐶∈C𝜆, 𝑥∈{0, 1}𝑛and 𝑇= 𝑇(𝜆) and any honestly generated
𝑐𝑟𝑠= (𝑡𝑝𝑘, 𝑝𝑘,𝑜,𝑑, Δ):
VC.Verify(𝑐𝑟𝑠,𝐶,𝑥, 𝜋,𝑦) = 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑝𝑘,𝑠𝑘, 𝜋) = 1
where 𝜋←𝑃(𝑝𝑘, (𝐶,𝑥)), 𝑑←Com(𝑠𝑘,𝑟), and 𝑦= (𝑠𝑘,𝑟) ←
TLP.Solve(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑜).
Regarding the efficiency requirement, it is clear that VC.Setup
will run in time poly(𝜆, |𝐶|, |𝑥|,𝑇) due to the size of 𝑝𝑘. Furthermore,
VC.Prove runs in time poly(𝜆, |𝐶|, |𝑥|,𝑇) as it will need to compute
the circuit and the proof, and VC.Reveal runs in time poly(𝜆,𝑇)
due to TLP.Solve, which will solve the puzzle in time Δ = poly(𝑇).
Remark 4.4 (Instance-Independent Variant). In our construc-
tion, the CRS is circuit-dependent since the underlying 2-round CVQC
requires this circuit to generate the verification key. Alternatively,
Alagic et al. [7] show a variant of a 2-round privately verifiable CVQC

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi
that is instance-independent at the cost of increasing the number of
parallel executions by a constant. This allows us to make VC.Setup
generate a CRS that is independent of the circuit-input pair (𝐶,𝑥).
4.2
Proof of Security
We prove that the protocol has Δ−soundness regarding Defini-
tion 4.2.
Proof. We show through a sequence of hybrids that the security
of our scheme can be reduced to the soundness of the underlying 2-
round CVQC, the security of the TLP, and the commitment scheme.
• 𝐻0: This is the original experiment as stated in Definition 4.1
where the adversary’s role as a malicious prover is to find a
convincing false proof that passes verification.
• 𝐻1: This is the same as 𝐻0 except that Step 5 of the Verify
phase is replaced with the following:
Output 𝑉𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑝𝑘,𝑠𝑘, 𝜋)
In other words, the verification procedure of the underlying
CVQC will use the original 𝑠𝑘instead of 𝑠𝑘′.
• 𝐻2: This is the same as 𝐻1 except that, in Step 5 of the Setup
phase, the puzzle is generated using a random string pair
𝑠𝑘∗
$←−{0, 1}𝑛, where 𝑛= |𝑠𝑘| + |𝑟|, instead of (𝑠𝑘,𝑟). That is,
the puzzle is generated as follows:
𝑜∗←TLP.GenPuzzle(𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘,𝑠𝑘∗)
• 𝐻3: The is the same as 𝐻2 except that, in Step 4 of the Setup
phase, the challenger commits to the same random string
𝑠𝑘
$←−{0, 1}𝑛used in the puzzle, instead of 𝑠𝑘. That is, the
commitment is generated as follows:
𝑑∗←Commit(𝑠𝑘∗)
Let Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻𝑖(𝐴) = | Pr
𝐻𝑖[Exp𝑉𝐶
𝐴[𝜆,𝑇] = 1] denote the adversary’s
success probability in the soundness game of Definition 4.1. The
following sequence of claims will show that Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻0 (𝐴) ≤negl(𝜆).
Claim 4.5. If the commitment scheme is computationally binding
against poly-time quantum adversaries, then:
|Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻0 (𝐴) −Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻1 (𝐴)| ≤negl(𝜆)
Proof. Let 𝐴be a QPT algorithm that succeeds in distinguish-
ing between 𝐻0 and 𝐻1 with non-negligible advantage. Then there
exists an efficient attacker 𝐵that acts as the challenger for 𝐴and
breaks the binding property of the commitment scheme (as stated in
Definition B.1) as follows. The attacker 𝐵would simulate the origi-
nal game for 𝐴exactly up until Step 5 of the Verify phase. Here, 𝐻0
and 𝐻1 will differ only if 𝑠𝑘′ ≠𝑠𝑘but Ver(𝑑, (𝑠𝑘′,𝑟′)) = 1, which
would imply breaking the binding property of the commitment
scheme. Thus, as long as the commitment scheme is computation-
ally binding the adversary’s advantage of distinguishing between
𝐻0 and 𝐻1 is negligible.
■
Claim 4.6. Assuming that the TLP is secure against poly-time
quantum adversaries, it holds then |Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻1 (𝐴)−Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻2 (𝐴)| ≤negl(𝜆).
Proof. Let 𝐴be a QPT adversary that succeeds in distinguishing
between 𝐻1 and 𝐻2 with non-negligible advantage. We show that
there exists an efficient attacker 𝐵= (𝐵1, 𝐵2) that acts as the chal-
lenger for 𝐴and breaks the security of the underlying TLP scheme
according to Definition 3.2 as follows. The attacker 𝐵1 starts by
running each step of VC.Setup(1𝜆, (𝐶,𝑥)), except in Step 2 it will
first receive 𝑡𝑝𝑘from the TLP challenger, and in Step 5 it will ask for
the challenge puzzle by submitting (𝑚0,𝑚1) as its chosen messages
where𝑚0 = (𝑠𝑘,𝑟) contains the secret key from Step 3 and𝑚1 = 𝑠𝑘∗
is some uniformly random string of size |𝑠𝑘| + |𝑟|. Once it receives
back the challenge puzzle 𝑜𝑏←TLP.GenPuzzle(𝑚𝑏,𝑡𝑝𝑘,𝑡𝑠𝑘), it
runs 𝐴on 𝑐𝑟𝑠𝑏= (𝑡𝑝𝑘, 𝑝𝑘,𝑜𝑏,𝑑), which generates a proof 𝜋.
Similarly, 𝐵2 will execute 𝐴(𝑐𝑟𝑠𝑏,𝐶,𝑥). We note, since the run-
ning time of 𝐴is 𝛿(Δ) < Δ, 𝐵2 will also have the same running time.
Furthermore, if the TLP challenger chooses to generate a puzzle for
𝑚0 = (𝑠𝑘,𝑟) then 𝑐𝑟𝑠𝑏will have a puzzle of 𝑠𝑘and the view of 𝐴
will be that in 𝐻1. On the other hand, if the TLP challenger chose
to generate a puzzle for 𝑚1 = 𝑠𝑘∗then the 𝑐𝑟𝑠𝑏will have a puzzle
of 𝑠𝑘∗and the view of 𝐴will be that in 𝐻2. The rest of the game
remains unchanged between the two hybrids. Since 𝐵simulates
𝐴’s challenge almost perfectly (with some negligible loss when
𝑠𝑘∗= (𝑠𝑘,𝑟)), the advantage of 𝐵is equal to that of 𝐴. Thus, as long
as the TLP is secure, the adversary’s advantage of distinguishing
between 𝐻1 and 𝐻2 is negligible.
■
Claim 4.7. Assuming that the commitment scheme is statistically
hiding against quantum adversaries, it holds that 𝐻2
s≈𝐻3.
Proof. Let 𝐴be a QPT adversary that can distinguish between
𝐻2 and 𝐻3 with a non-negligible advantage. Then we can construct
an adversary 𝐵that acts as the challenger for 𝐴and uses it to
break the hiding property of the underlying commitment scheme.
The attacker 𝐵starts by running each step in the Setup exactly
as in 𝐻2 except now in Step 4 it will first submit (𝑚0,𝑚1) to the
challenger in the hiding game of the commitment scheme where
𝑚0 = (𝑠𝑘,𝑟) and 𝑚1 = 𝑠𝑘∗for some random 𝑠𝑘∗
$←−{0, 1}|𝑠𝑘|+|𝑟|.
Once it gets back the challenge commitment 𝑑𝑏←Com(𝑚𝑏), it
runs 𝐴on 𝑐𝑟𝑠𝑏= (𝑡𝑝𝑘, 𝑝𝑘,𝑜∗,𝑑𝑏, Δ) and (𝐶,𝑥). The rest of the steps
remain the same. If the challenger chose to create a commitment for
𝑚0 = (𝑠𝑘,𝑟) then the view of 𝐴will be that in 𝐻2. If a commitment
of 𝑚1 = 𝑠𝑘∗was generated instead then the view of 𝐴will be that
in 𝐻3. Since 𝐵simulates 𝐴’s challenge almost perfectly (with some
negligible loss when 𝑠𝑘∗= (𝑠𝑘,𝑟)), the advantage of 𝐵in breaking
the commitment scheme is equal to that of 𝐴.
■
Claim 4.8. If the 2-round privately verifiable CVQC scheme is
computationally sound against all malicious QPT provers, Com is com-
putationally binding/hiding, and the TLP is secure, then the advantage
of 𝐴in 𝐻3 is negligible.
Proof. Let 𝐴be a QPT adversary that can break soundness in
𝐻3. We then show how to construct an adversary 𝐵that will act
as 𝐴’s challenger and use it to break the soundness of the under-
lying privately verifiable CVQC scheme. 𝐵starts by requesting 𝑝𝑘
from its challenger (𝑠𝑘will be kept secret from 𝐵), creates a ran-
dom puzzle 𝑜∗and commitment 𝑑∗of a random string, then sends
𝑐𝑟𝑠= (𝑡𝑝𝑘, 𝑝𝑘,𝑜∗,𝑑∗, Δ) to 𝐴. Once 𝐴sends its proof 𝜋𝜏and decom-
mitment 𝑦, 𝐵will run 𝑏1 ←VC.Verify(𝑐𝑟𝑠,𝐶,𝑥, 𝜋𝜏,𝑦) and, after
it reveals (𝑠𝑘∗,𝑟), also runs 𝑏2 ←VC.Verify(𝑐𝑟𝑠,𝐶,𝑥, 𝜋𝜏, (𝑠𝑘∗,𝑟)).
Since 𝐵exactly simulates the view of 𝐴in this game, we have that

Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Pr[B wins] = Adv𝑉𝐶
𝐻3 (𝐴) ≤Pr[𝑏1 ∨𝑏2|𝐶(𝑥) = 0 ∨𝑦≠𝑠𝑘∗] ≤
Pr[𝑏1|𝐶(𝑥) = 0 ∨𝑦≠𝑠𝑘∗] + Pr[𝑏2|𝐶(𝑥) = 0 ∨𝑦≠𝑠𝑘∗].
We note that if 𝑏1 = 1 while 𝐶(𝑥) = 0 and 𝑦≠𝑠𝑘∗then this
implies that 𝐴found 𝑠𝑘′ ≠𝑠𝑘∗which passes Ver(𝑑∗,𝑠𝑘′) or directly
found 𝑠𝑘∗from the commitment 𝑑∗or puzzle 𝑜∗(before time Δ).
However, by the security of the underlying primitives, this only
happens with negligible probability. Thus Pr[𝑏1 = 1|𝐶(𝑥) = 0 ∨𝑦≠
𝑠𝑘∗] ≤negl(𝜆). Observe also that, during the second verification
phase (post key release), if 𝑏2 = 1 then it must be that 𝑦= 𝑠𝑘∗yet
since 𝐶(𝑥) = 0 this implies that 𝜋𝜏has passed as a valid forged
proof against the real secret key 𝑠𝑘, violating the soundness of the
underlying CVQC protocol.
■
Putting it all together to prove Theorem 4.3, we get that 𝐻0
c≈
𝐻1
c≈𝐻2
s≈𝐻3, Adv𝐻3
𝐴≤negl(𝜆). Hence, the advantage of adversary
𝐴winning in 𝐻0 is negligible.
□
5
Experimental Results
In this section, we demonstrate the feasibility of our approach by
simulating the protocol between a classical client who wishes to
delegate quantum circuits of various sizes to a quantum server. Our
implementation is a proof of concept with small security parameters,
focusing primarily on measuring the time complexity of the parts
of the protocol that dominate running time. In particular, we im-
plemented the algorithms of the TLP (TLP.Setup, TLP.GenPuzzle,
TLP.Solve), and the actual quantum circuit computation executed
by the prover, and which happens to be part of the VC.Prove subrou-
tine. Other parts of the protocol such commitments and VC.Verify
were not simulated as they are relatively less time-consuming. The
verifier’s Feynman-Kitaev construction of the Hamiltonian [37] is
assumed to be part of the preprocessing phase before the protocol
starts so we do not consider it in our simulation.
Our implementation includes a variant of the TLP puzzle pro-
posed in [5], which is based on reusable garbling circuit techniques.
While the original scheme uses lattice-based succinct randomized
encodings for their reusable garbling mechanism, we instead build
upon the implementation of [47] which exhibits weaker security
guarantees but is more practical. Additionally, relying on the fact
that random oracles are unconditionally sequential [68], we instan-
tiate our sequential function using SHA-256.
The simulations were performed on a t3.medium AWS instance
with 2 vCPUs (3.1 GHz each), 4GB of memory, and access to an SV1
universal state vector simulator to execute quantum circuits (as the
prover) on a cloud-based quantum simulation platform, specifically,
AWS Braket. We use the Qiskit SDK [54] to define, build, transpile,
and run the quantum circuits on the SV1 simulator. Each instance
of the simulation is averaged over at least 20 different executions
of the quantum circuit. The source code is available at [75].
5.1
Random Quantum Circuits
Table 2 shows the results of our experiments when tested against
randomly generated quantum circuits of 5, 10, and 15 qubits, with
a depth ranging between 10 and 300 gates. Random circuits were
sampled using Qiskit’s random_circuit function which generates
circuits over a random distribution on the standard gates (e.g., Pauli,
phase, swap, Hadamard, and controlled gates). For each qubit-depth
setting, we simulated 20 different random quantum circuits and
measured the time it takes for the prover to execute these circuits
𝑇. The client can use this to determine the required setting of Δ
for any circuit of depth 𝐷such that the time to solve the puzzle is
much greater than 𝑇. In all cases, we observed that, for the verifier,
generating a puzzle is almost constant, whereas the bulk of the
time was spent in the setup phase and is attributed to the reusable
garbling mechanism (which is dependent on the circuit depth).
Across all settings, the prover’s circuit execution time𝑇increases
with both depth and number of qubits (e.g. from 1.84 ms for 5 qubits
at depth 10, up to 228.81 ms for 15 qubits at depth 300) which directly
guides the client’s choice of the time-delay parameter for releas-
ing the verification parameters. In particular, the puzzle-solving
TLP.Solve time is tuned to remain larger than the observed compu-
tation time. On the client side, puzzle generation TLP.GenPuzzle
stays constant and negligible (≈0.05–0.07 ms). The dominant over-
head appears in the puzzle setup cost TLP.Setup; however, this cost
amortizes cleanly across multiple puzzle generations, as reflected
by the amortized TLP.Setup column.
5.2
Enhanced Hybrid HHL
We also evaluated the protocol over a variant of the Harrow–Hassidim
–Lloyd (HHL) circuits [46, 93], specifically enhanced hybrid HHL,
which are known to take advantage of quantum speedup when
solving large (sparse) linear systems and have been found to be par-
ticularly effective in finance applications including mean-variance
portfolio optimization and risk assessment [84]. They are thus ap-
propriate candidates for testing as classical algorithms would want
to delegate these circuits to quantum-capable, yet potentially un-
trustworthy servers. We used the enhanced hybrid HHL algorithm
(which has both classical and quantum computations) as opposed to
the vanilla one since the former is more efficient in practice given
the current quantum hardware capabilities.
Figure 4 shows the results for different sizes of circuits that cor-
respond to different instances of the matrices which represent the
system of linear equations. The depth can be used to estimate the
time it takes to solve the circuit and thus determine the appropri-
ate time Δ for which the puzzle should be solved. The parameter
𝜇specifies the number of iterations of the sequential function to
achieve this Δ. We observe from Figure 4(a) that the circuit depth
grows approximately linearly with the size of the problem instance
𝑁. Figure 4(b) indicates that the measured execution time increases
substantially with matrix (instance) size 𝑁, reaching on the order
of minutes for the largest tested instances. These results allow the
client to scale the sequential work factor 𝜇of the time-lock puzzle
so that puzzle solving completes (in Δ time) only after the prover
finishes the HHL computation and produces the timestamped proof.
Lastly, we see from Figure 4(c) that the average fidelity (which
roughly represents the correctness of the quantum circuit upon
measurement) of HHL degrades almost linearly with 𝑁. This is
expected, as deeper circuits are prone to decoherence due to noise.
While quantum error correction can be used to mitigate this is-
sue, the depth (and hence the running time 𝑇) would significantly
increase and the client should take into account this increase by
setting 𝜇appropriately and get the desired Δ > 𝑇.

CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
Ameer Mohammed, Aydin Abadi, and Jaffer Mahdi
Quantum Circuit
Time-Lock Puzzle (TLP)
# Qubits
Depth
T (ms)
TLP.Solve (ms)
TLP.GenPuzzle (ms)
TLP.Setup (ms)
Amortized TLP.Setup (ms)
𝜇
5
10
1.84
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
20
2.31
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
50
4.56
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
100
8.13
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
200
16.84
32.97
0.05
6577.50
328.88
3
300
22.84
45.83
0.06
10513.51
525.68
4
10
10
3.14
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
20
5.34
13.63
0.05
1445.57
72.28
1
50
11.78
24.24
0.06
3672.94
183.65
2
100
20.47
32.97
0.05
6577.50
328.88
3
200
41.06
85.37
0.05
25915.06
1295.75
7
300
58.01
117.25
0.05
48829.51
2441.48
10
15
10
10.52
24.24
0.06
3672.94
183.65
2
20
19.39
32.97
0.05
6577.50
328.88
3
50
49.51
103.16
0.05
40500.14
2025.01
9
100
98.38
196.48
0.07
120891.41
6044.57
17
200
168.56
339.30
0.05
52020.00
2601.00
30
300
228.81
462.57
0.05
97161.80
4858.09
41
Table 2: The execution time (averaged over 20 trials) 𝑇of running a random quantum circuit for different numbers of qubits
and circuit depths and the corresponding time elapsed for the time-lock puzzle setup (TLP.Setup, total and amortized over the
20 different puzzle generations), generation (TLP.GenPuzzle), and solving (TLP.Solve = Δ). The parameter 𝜇corresponds to the
number of executions of the sequential function to achieve the corresponding Δ time for any given circuit execution time 𝑇.
2
4
8
16
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
Matrix Size (𝑁)
Circuit Depth
(a) Circuit Depth
2
4
8
16
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
𝜇= 1, 350
𝜇= 2, 700
𝜇= 4, 500
𝜇= 10, 800
Matrix Size (𝑁)
Time (seconds)
(b) Execution Time
2
4
8
16
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Matrix Size (𝑁)
Fidelity
(c) Fidelity
Figure 4: (a) Circuit depth scaling with matrix size, showing a linear relationship between the two. (b) The average running time
of the HHL circuit for different matrix dimensions 𝑁and the corresponding 𝜇for the time-lock puzzle that ensures it is solved
only after the HHL circuit is complete. (c) The average fidelity (how well it adheres to the true solution) for each matrix size (𝑁)
6
Conclusion and Future Work
This work proposes a verifiable computation scheme for quantum
circuits which can be publicly verified by any third party after a
set amount of time has elapsed. We demonstrate how a privately
and classically verifiable quantum computation can be transformed
into a publicly verifiable one by mainly relying on the recently
introduced post-quantum time-lock puzzle [5]. Unlike previous
work (that relied on iO), our scheme can be solely based on the LWE
assumption, which is falsifiable and thus arguably more dependable
than ones that are not falsifiable.
It remains open to find an approach that achieves (non-time-
based) public verifiability in the plain model and under standard
assumptions. It would also be useful to have a publicly verifiable
scheme that is applicable in the more common setting where the
verification key is made available as soon as the circuit is delegated.
Furthermore, the CRS in our scheme is not reusable (it can only be

Time-Delayed Publicly Verifiable Quantum Computation for Classical Verifiers
CCS ’26, November 15–19, 2026, The Hague, The Netherlands
used to prove a single statement), regardless of whether the setup
is instance-dependent or not. This is due to the fact that security
(verifiability) is only guaranteed as long as the time-lock puzzle,
which hides the secret verification key, is not solved. Therefore, it
is an interesting open question to upgrade this scheme into one
with a universal CRS that can be used to prove the correctness of
multiple computations at once without increasing its size. Lastly,
while verifiable computation schemes are generally concerned with
malicious provers, extending security against malicious verifiers,
who may attempt to falsely accuse the prover of providing an
incorrect proof, is a promising future direction.