1
PRAG: End-to-End Privacy-Preserving
Retrieval-Augmented Generation
Zhijun Li, Minghui Xu, Member, IEEE, Huayi Qi, Wenxuan Yu, Tingchuang Zhang, Qiao Zhang, GuangYong
Shang, Zhen Ma, Xiuzhen Cheng, Fellow, IEEE
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible
publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after
which this version may no longer be accessible.
Abstract—Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is essential
for enhancing Large Language Models (LLMs) with external
knowledge, but its reliance on cloud environments exposes sensi-
tive data to privacy risks. Existing privacy-preserving solutions
often sacrifice retrieval quality due to noise injection or only
provide partial encryption. We propose PRAG, an end-to-end
privacy-preserving RAG system that achieves end-to-end confi-
dentiality for both documents and queries without sacrificing the
scalability of cloud-hosted RAG. PRAG features a dual-mode
architecture: a non-interactive PRAG-I utilizes homomorphic-
friendly approximations for low-latency retrieval, while an inter-
active PRAG-II leverages client assistance to match the accuracy
of non-private RAG. To ensure robust semantic ordering, we
introduce Operation-Error Estimation (OEE), a mechanism that
stabilizes ranking against homomorphic noise. Experiments on
large-scale datasets demonstrate that PRAG achieves competitive
recall (72.45%–74.45%), practical retrieval latency, and strong
resilience against graph reconstruction attacks while maintaining
end-to-end confidentiality. This work confirms the feasibility of
secure, high-performance RAG at scale.
Index Terms—Privacy-preserving RAG, homomorphic encryp-
tion, secure similarity retrieval, access-pattern leakage, encrypted
HNSW.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid proliferation of Large Language Models
(LLMs) in question-answering and decision-support settings,
combined with recent advances in knowledge-intensive ar-
tificial intelligence systems, an increasing number of users
are investigating the use of Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) to construct private knowledge-base applications over
proprietary data [1], [2]. In particular, RAG facilitates the
integration of LLMs with intelligent retrieval methods, thereby
enabling the deployment of knowledge-centric applications in
a flexible, rapid, and low-code fashion [3]–[5].
Motivated by these advantages, cloud-based RAG has
emerged as the predominant deployment paradigm [6], [7].
Major cloud providers, including Amazon, Google, and Al-
ibaba Cloud, now offer native capabilities for seamlessly
Zhijun Li, Minghui Xu, Wenxuan Yu, Tingchuang Zhang, Qiao
Zhang, and Xiuzhen Cheng are with Shandong University. (e-mail:
richikun2014@gmail.com, mhxu@sdu.edu.cn, 202115114@mail.sdu.edu.cn,
tczhang@mail.sdu.edu.cn, qiao.zhang@sdu.edu.cn, xzcheng@sdu.edu.cn).
Huayi Qi is with Tsinghua University. (e-mail: huayiqi@tsinghua.edu.cn).
GuangYong Shang and Zhen Ma are with Inspur Yunzhou In-
dustrial Internet Co., Ltd. (e-mail: shangguangyong@inspur.com,
mazhenrj@inspur.com).
Corresponding author: Minghui Xu
integrating personal and enterprise document repositories into
RAG pipelines [8]–[10]. This allows organizations to rapidly
deploy AI agents with scalable, low-latency access to pro-
prietary knowledge, but also causes sensitive document and
retrieval indices to reside persistently on cloud servers, ex-
posing a new attack surface. In practice, authorized users
may even access such cloud-hosted knowledge bases from
mobile devices, further extending both the convenience and
the exposure surface of this deployment model. A series
of large-scale data breaches since 2024 demonstrates the
vulnerability of cloud-hosted data at scale. Notably, the Mother
of All Breaches (MOAB) exposed over 26 billion credential
records [11], while other incidents targeted universities, gov-
ernment contractors, and major technology vendors, including
Huawei and Google [12]–[15]. These events demonstrate that
storing sensitive data in the cloud without strong cryptographic
protection poses a systemic and ongoing privacy risk.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF PRIVACY-PRESERVING RAG SCHEMES
Scheme
Method
Doc (D)
Protection
Query (Q)
Protection
Provable Guarantee
RemoteRAG [7]
DP1
Plaintext
DP-perturbed
ε-DP (Q)
DP-RAG [16],
DPVoteRAG [17],
Text-DP [18]
DP
DP-
perturbed
Plaintext
ε-DP (D)
SANNS [19],
TipToe [20]
HE2
Plaintext
Encrypted
Semantic security (Q)
Pacmann [21]
PIR3
Plaintext
PIR-protected
PIR security (Q)
Fortify [22]
TEE
Plaintext
TEE-protected
Trusted hardware (Q)
PRAG (Ours)
HE
Encrypted
Encrypted
Semantic security
(D, Q)
1 DP: Differential Privacy.
2 HE: Homomorphic Encryption.
3 PIR: Private Information Retrieval.
Current research into privacy-preserving RAG explores a
spectrum of solutions ranging from local deployment to sta-
tistical noise injection and hardware-based execution environ-
ments, each offering different trade-offs between security and
utility as shown in Table I. To avoid exposing documents and
queries to the cloud, local deployments [1], [2], [6] keep all
data on the client side. However, this design is ill-suited for
shared, cloud-hosted RAG settings because it lacks support
for multi-user collaboration, centralized administration, and
scalable management of large-scale knowledge bases.
To address these limitations while remaining in the cloud,
some systems adopt Differential Privacy (DP) to reduce infor-
arXiv:2604.26525v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026

2
mation leakage by injecting noise into documents [16]–[18].
While these approaches protect statistical privacy, they do not
provide provable data confidentiality; the cloud still stores per-
turbed document representations in plaintext and can observe
access patterns during retrieval. RemoteRAG [7] improves
upon this by perturbing user queries, preventing the cloud from
directly observing query contents. Nevertheless, the underlying
documents remain stored and processed in plaintext, leaving
the hosted knowledge base visible to the cloud provider;
SANNS [19], TipToe [20], and Pacmann [21] have the same
limitation in that they protect query privacy but not document
privacy, which may be acceptable for public dataset but not
for private knowledge bases. Alternatively, TEE-based RAG
systems [22] protect query processing by executing retrieval
within trusted hardware enclaves. This significantly reduces
data exposure during computation, though its security remains
tied to specific hardware trust assumptions. This raises a new
problem:
Is it possible to achieve end-to-end confidentiality for both
documents and queries without sacrificing the scalability of
cloud-hosted RAG?
A practical solution must maintain the corpus in the cloud
while providing robust cryptographic protection and preserv-
ing the full functionality required by RAG. In particular,
a privacy-preserving RAG system must support three core
operations: secure similarity computation between a query
embedding and document embeddings, efficient ranking to
select the top-k contexts for generation, and real-time updates
to keep the knowledge base synchronized with continuously
changing data. Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search,
with its sub-linear query complexity and favorable recall-
latency trade-off, is naturally suited for retrieval over large-
scale embedding corpora in modern RAG systems. To ensure
the cloud learns nothing about document contents, these opera-
tions cannot be performed on plaintext and must instead be ex-
ecuted entirely in the ciphertext domain. Under this end-to-end
encrypted cloud setting, these requirements effectively leave
Secure Similarity Retrieval (SSR) [19], [23]–[26] as the most
viable design direction, since it enables similarity retrieval
directly over encrypted data in the cloud. However, existing
Secure Similarity Retrieval schemes still have limitations in
practical RAG deployments.
A. Why SSR Fails in Privacy-Preserving RAG
Partial Support for RAG Functionality in Secure Sim-
ilarity Retrieval. Although secure similarity computation,
efficient ranking, and real-time updates are the pillars of
privacy-preserving RAG systems, current SSR schemes fail
to provide these three capabilities concurrently, as shown in
Table II. The following analysis identifies the specific gaps in
existing solutions.
First, several schemes support similarity computation but
rely on encryption primitives that have been shown to be
insecure under practical attack models, such as ASPE-based
constructions [23], [24]. Although these approaches support
encrypted similarity computation, their security guarantees are
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF SECURE SIMILARITY RETRIEVAL SCHEMES
Scheme
Secure
Similarity
Computation
Efficient
Ranking
Real-Time
Updates
Huang et al. [23]
SPE-Sim [24]
SESR [25]
PDQ [26]
MSecKNN [28]
FSkNN [29]
PRAG (Ours)
: Supported;
: Not supported;
: Partial support under specific
settings or with performance constraints.
limited for protecting knowledge bases [27]. Second, efficient
RAG retrieval requires ranking similarity scores to select
the most relevant context. However, schemes such as SPE-
Sim [24] and SESR [25] do not support numeric comparison in
the ciphertext domain. Without native encrypted comparison,
these systems cannot perform top-k ranking without leaking
sensitive score distributions or requiring trusted-party decryp-
tion. Third, the dynamic nature of RAG requires support for
evolving datasets, yet many schemes, such as PDQ [26] and
SESR [25], lack real-time update capabilities. Their index
structures often rely on global organization or rigid parti-
tioning, making new insertions computationally prohibitive.
This limitation affects the handling of continuously evolving
knowledge bases.
Distortion of retrieval ranking. Even when encrypted
comparison is available, or when the system relies on an HE-
friendly ranking surrogate, the ordering of similarity scores can
change under CKKS-style approximate arithmetic. In privacy-
preserving RAG, each similarity score is computed through
multiple steps, including packed inner products, rescaling
and rounding, and in fully homomorphic settings, polynomial
approximations for selection. These steps introduce errors
that may vary across candidates and accumulate during re-
trieval [30], [31].
This leads to two challenges. First, top-k retrieval is sen-
sitive to score differences [32], [33]. If two candidates have
similar true scores, even a small error can flip their order.
Second, error depends on both input data and retrieval path.
Different candidates may accumulate different error due to
different operation counts, such as different traversal lengths,
making a single absolute error bound insufficient. The core
challenge is therefore to keep total perturbation below the sim-
ilarity margin that separates relevant documents from near ties,
so encrypted retrieval preserves ranking with high probability.
B. Our Contribution
To address these challenges, we propose PRAG, an end-
to-end privacy-preserving RAG framework that enables high-
accuracy retrieval over encrypted knowledge bases. Our con-
tributions are summarized as follows:
• Bridging secure similarity retrieval and basic RAG
functionality. To address the incompatibility between ex-
isting secure similarity retrieval schemes and basic RAG

3
requirements, we develop a CKKS-compatible encrypted
retrieval backend that supports (1) similarity scoring
via homomorphic inner products, (2) ranking through
Chebyshev polynomial approximations or client-assisted
comparisons, and (3) real-time updates using a ciphertext-
resident hierarchical index with homomorphic clustering
and encrypted HNSW navigation.
• An end-to-end privacy-preserving RAG system with
dual-mode operation. We propose PRAG, an end-to-
end privacy-preserving RAG system that supports two
deployable modes within a unified encrypted architecture:
a non-interactive PRAG-I mode that performs retrieval
fully in the ciphertext domain via homomorphic-friendly
approximations, and an interactive, client-assisted PRAG-
II mode that leverages limited client-side assistance to im-
prove ranking precision and retrieval accuracy, achieving
average top-10 retrieval latencies of under 1.29 seconds
and around 7.91 seconds, respectively, on a 100,000-
sample dataset. In our experiments, the two modes
achieve recall rates of 72.45% and 74.45%, respectively,
while sharing the same encrypted corpus and index and
enabling on-demand switching without re-encrypting data
or rebuilding indices. The system further incorporates
access-pattern mitigation against graph reconstruction at-
tacks, together with formal leakage analysis and empirical
evaluation of the resulting security-utility trade-off.
• Noise-aware
ranking
stabilization
via
Operation-
Error Estimation (OEE). We introduce OEE, a noise
control method that models how approximation error and
CKKS noise affect similarity scores during encrypted
retrieval. Rather than focusing only on numeric accuracy,
OEE targets preservation of the relative order of similarity
scores, which significantly impacts retrieval quality in
RAG. Specifically, OEE accounts for: (1) polynomially
approximated comparisons, which occur only in PRAG-
I; and (2) homomorphic noise and hierarchical index
traversal, which affect both PRAG-I and PRAG-II. Using
OEE, we guide parameter selection to bound ranking
errors, making ranking stability an explicit design goal
for encrypted retrieval.
The remainder of this paper details the system architecture,
security model, and protocol design, followed by experimental
evaluation and discussion.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Privacy-Preserving RAG (PRAG)
Existing privacy-preserving RAG research can be broadly
organized into three routes: statistical perturbation of the
retrieval pipeline, system-level trust decomposition, and se-
lective plaintext assistance during retrieval or ranking. This
taxonomy clarifies the central gap in the literature: prior
systems usually strengthen one aspect of privacy, but they do
not simultaneously provide end-to-end corpus confidentiality,
accurate semantic retrieval, and practical cloud deployment.
RAG first introduced by Lewis et al. [34] and later re-
fined by Active RAG [35] established the retrieval-generation
paradigm, but these works do not consider the privacy risks
of sensitive corpora. Subsequent analyses by Huang et al. [36]
and Zeng et al. [37] showed that retrieved knowledge and
training signals can leak private information. One line of
defense therefore adds statistical noise to the retrieval pipeline.
DP-based approaches [16]–[18] and embedding perturbation
methods such as PRESS [38] improve privacy for queries or
outputs, but they inevitably distort similarity relationships and
still leave the outsourced corpus exposed in plaintext.
A second route reduces reliance on a single cloud server
through architectural redesign. Federated systems such as
FRAG [39], blockchain-based systems such as D-RAG [40],
split execution [2], and isolated-enclave solutions [1], [6]
all limit the trust placed in one component of the system.
However, these designs typically introduce substantial com-
munication or coordination overhead and still do not provide
an efficient encrypted vector index that supports RAG-style
semantic search.
A third route keeps part of the pipeline encrypted but reveals
intermediate information to recover accuracy or efficiency.
Privacy-Aware RAG [41], for example, requires selective de-
cryption during ranking, which breaks end-to-end confiden-
tiality and reintroduces exposure during the most ranking-
sensitive stage of retrieval.
In summary, the three main RAG directions correspond to
three incomplete trade-offs: perturbation-based methods sacri-
fice utility, trust-decomposition methods sacrifice practicality,
and plaintext-assisted methods sacrifice full confidentiality.
PRAG is designed to close this gap by supporting clustering,
HNSW traversal, and ranking over a fully encrypted corpus
under an untrusted server model.
B. Secure Similarity Retrieval
Existing secure similarity retrieval (SSR) work can likewise
be summarized along three routes: query-private retrieval over
plaintext corpora, encrypted similarity computation with weak
or limited ranking semantics, and structured encrypted indexes
that still fall short of RAG’s ANN requirements. This lens
makes clear why current SSR primitives cannot be plugged
into RAG directly without losing either security or function-
ality.
Early works such as SANNS [19] and TipToe [20] protect
the query while leaving the document embeddings exposed
on the server. Pacmann [21] shifts crucial computation back
to the client because it cannot support server-side comparison
and similarity computation securely. These systems therefore
do not meet the end-to-end confidentiality requirement of
outsourced RAG.
Huang et al. [23] proposed an ASPE-based method, but
ASPE is not secure against ciphertext-only attacks [27].
Subsequent efforts extended query semantics to support set
similarities, as in SPE-Sim [24] and SESR [25], or numerical
comparisons over integers, as in PDQ [26]. Even when these
systems support secure arithmetic, they do not provide the con-
tinuous, ranking-preserving comparisons needed for semantic
vector retrieval in RAG.
Some methods [42] use clustering or quantization, but
they partition the feature space rigidly and break semantic

4
continuity across clusters. Real-time update mechanisms from
keyword-based systems [43]–[45] are not directly compatible
with continuous embedding retrieval. Recent designs based on
R-trees [46], [47] or specialized encodings [48], [49] improve
structure, yet none jointly support ANN graph navigation,
iterative centroid refinement, and semantically faithful vector
operations.
Overall, existing SSR schemes each cover only a sub-
set of the requirements for encrypted RAG. For example,
SANNS [19] requires multiple online parties, and update
operations can disrupt cluster balance and trigger costly recon-
struction. As a result, no prior SSR scheme simultaneously sat-
isfies the navigational, semantic, dynamic, and cryptographic
requirements of practical privacy-preserving RAG.
III. PRELIMINARIES
A. Graph-Based ANN Search
Approximate Nearest Neighbor (ANN) search is a funda-
mental operation in high-dimensional vector databases that
trades exactness for efficiency, returning approximate nearest
neighbors with sub-linear query complexity. Among ANN
approaches, graph-based methods have emerged as the state-
of-the-art for high-dimensional similarity search due to their
superior recall-latency trade-off. These methods construct a
proximity graph over the dataset where each node represents
a data point and edges connect nearby points. Search proceeds
by greedily traversing the graph from an entry point, iteratively
moving to neighbors closer to the query until reaching a local
optimum. Compared to tree-based methods (e.g., KD-trees)
that suffer from the curse of dimensionality, and hashing-based
methods (e.g., LSH) that require parameter tuning for specific
distance distributions, graph-based methods adaptively capture
the intrinsic data manifold and achieve robust performance
across diverse datasets.
Hierarchical Navigable Small World (HNSW) is a repre-
sentative graph-based ANN algorithm that extends the basic
proximity graph with a multi-layered hierarchical structure. It
organizes data points into a multi-layered graph to perform
search in a coarse-to-fine manner, where sparse upper layers
facilitate rapid global navigation and dense lower layers enable
accurate local refinement. At each layer, the search follows a
greedy routing rule: starting from a designated entry node,
the algorithm iteratively evaluates the distances to the current
node’s neighbors and moves to the neighbor that is closest
to the query vector. This process continues until no adjacent
neighbor is closer to the query than the current node, reaching
a local optimum that serves as the entry point for the next
lower layer.
To illustrate this mechanism concretely, consider a typical
three-layer HNSW configuration consisting of a sparse top
layer (L2), a middle layer (L1), and a dense base layer (L0)
containing all data points, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The retrieval
process is initialized at a predefined global entry node in
L2, where the algorithm performs a rapid greedy traversal to
”zoom in” on the general region of the query while bypassing
large portions of irrelevant data. Once a local optimum is iden-
tified in L2, the search transitions to L1, using that optimum
as the new entry point. Since L1 possesses a denser topology,
it provides a finer-grained routing path to further narrow the
search space. Finally, the search descends into the densest
layer, L0, to execute a precise localized greedy search, often
maintaining a dynamic candidate list to pinpoint the exact top-
k nearest neighbors. This hierarchical transition ensures that
the search complexity scales sub-linearly, typically O(log N),
while maintaining high recall in high-dimensional spaces.
L2
L1
L0
Entry
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the HNSW structure.
B. K-means Clustering
K-means clustering is a widely used unsupervised learning
algorithm for partitioning |D| data points into k clusters, where
each data point belongs to the cluster with the nearest centroid.
The algorithm iteratively minimizes the within-cluster sum
of squared distances by updating cluster assignments and
centroids until convergence. Formally, given a set of data
points {x1, x2, . . . , xn} in a d-dimensional space, the goal is
to find centroids {µ1, . . . , µk} that minimize
n
X
i=1
min
j∈{1,...,k} ∥xi −µj∥2.
C. CKKS and Primitives
We briefly introduce the CKKS homomorphic encryption
abstraction used in this work. CKKS supports approximate
arithmetic on packed vectors, enabling homomorphic addition,
multiplication, and slot rotations. We use the following high-
level primitives:
• KeyGen(λ) →(pk, sk, evk).
• Encrypt(pk, v) →ctv and Decrypt(sk, ct) →v′.
• Add, Mul, Rotate: homomorphic slot-wise operations.
D. Chebyshev Polynomial Approximation (ChebyApprox)
Let s = (s1, . . . , sC) ∈RC be similarity scores or distance
scores, and let τ > 0 be a scaling parameter. Since CKKS
supports only additions and multiplications efficiently, we
approximate a monotone comparison surrogate over a bounded
interval with a degree-d Chebyshev polynomial
Cd(x) =
d
X
m=0
amTm(x),

5
where Tm(·) is the m-th Chebyshev polynomial of the first
kind. We then define
ChebyApprox(si) := wi =
Cd(−si/τ)
PC
j=1 Cd(−sj/τ)
,
i ∈[C].
The resulting weights w = (w1, . . . , wC) satisfy PC
i=1 wi = 1
and provide an HE-friendly surrogate for comparison-based
ranking.
IV. PROBLEM STATEMENT
A. System Setting
Our proposed framework is designed for an environment
where data providers can contribute to a shared encrypted
RAG database. The architecture comprises two main entities:
a trusted Client, and a semi-honest Cloud Server.
A trusted Client serves two roles. As the data owner, it
normalizes private documents into embedding vectors, builds
the search index, encrypts the entire dataset and index struc-
ture, and uploads the ciphertexts to the Cloud Server. As
an authorized user, it transforms a query into multiple sub-
queries, encrypts them, and submits them to the server; upon
receiving the encrypted retrieval results from the cloud, it
decrypts them and forwards the plaintext context to the large
language model for response generation.
The Cloud Server is a semi-honest provider that hosts
the encrypted database. Upon receiving an encrypted query,
it performs all similarity-matching computations directly on
ciphertexts, without any decryption key access, and returns
the top-k encrypted candidates to the Client. The Client then
decrypts and reranks the results locally.
B. Threat Model
We model the cloud server as a Probabilistic Polynomial-
Time (PPT) adversary A under the semi-honest model. The
adversary:
• Infers sensitive information from all observable data;
• Holds no secret key sk and does not collude with others.
• Correctly executes all protocols using provided keys;
The adversary’s view consists of:
ViewA =

{ct(i)
v }|D|
i=1, {ct(j)
q }Q
j=1, CT inter, Params, L

,
(1)
where {ct(i)
v },{ct(j)
q } are encrypted database, queries, CT inter
are intermediate ciphertexts generated during computation,
Params are public parameters such as λ, N, and τ, and L
is the leakage function defined in Appendix A.
C. Design Goals
• Data Privacy (Semantic Confidentiality). All document
embeddings, query embeddings, similarity scores, and
final rankings must remain semantically hidden from the
cloud server. Formally, the CKKS-encrypted ciphertexts
ensure IND-CPA security: for any two datasets V0, V1
and queries q0, q1 of equal size, the adversary’s views
are computationally indistinguishable. We formalize this
as semantic confidentiality.
Definition IV.1 (Semantic Confidentiality). Our frame-
work achieves semantic confidentiality if for any PPT
adversary A, there exists a PPT simulator S such that:
n
ViewA(D, {q(i)})
o c≈
n
S

L(D, {q(i)}), 1λo
, (2)
where
c≈denotes computational indistinguishability.
Additionally, the permitted leakage L consists of access
patterns during HNSW traversal and cluster probing.
PRAG explicitly bounds this leakage via random access
perturbation to prevent graph reconstruction attacks. We
categorize access-pattern-based graph reconstruction at-
tacks as a class of LAAs, where the adversary exploits
observable retrieval traces to infer hidden index topology.
• Ranking Stability under Noise. The system ensures
that semantic ranking is robust to approximation error
and homomorphic noise. In particular, retrieval quality
is preserved by explicitly controlling ranking deviations
rather than only minimizing numeric error.
• Practical and Efficient Dual-mode System Design.
The overall design targets real-world RAG workloads by
supporting efficient and accurate retrieval on large-scale
datasets with real-time updates, and by enabling dual-
mode operation to trade latency for ranking accuracy,
including fully homomorphic non-interactive retrieval and
client-assisted retrieval.
TABLE III
SUMMARY OF CORE NOTATIONS
Symbol
Description
|D|
Dataset size
d
Vector dimension
C
Number of clusters
T
K-means iterations
τ
Chebyshev scaling parameter
ct(·)
Encrypted ciphertext, such as vector ctv or score cts
N
Set of neighbors
Cprobe
Number of clusters probed per query
ksub
Number of sub-queries generated per cluster
SIP
Noise of a single homomorphic inner product
v, q
Plaintext vectors (data and query)
N, λ
CKKS polynomial modulus degree and security pa-
rameter
pk, sk, evk
Public key, secret key, and evaluation keys (rlk, galk)
L, M, Deph
HNSW parameters: max layers, max degree, and
search depth
V. PRIVACY-PRESERVING RAG
In this section, we present two complementary privacy-
preserving RAG frameworks as shown in Fig. 2: a non-
interactive PRAG-I that achieves end-to-end encrypted re-
trieval, and an interactive PRAG-II that enhances ranking
precision. Both frameworks share the same data preprocessing
and response generation stages, but differ in Setup, Retrieve
and Update stages. The key notations used in our protocols
are shown in Table III.

6
Client
LLM&
OpenAIEmb
Enc(Pk, Vi)
ChebyApprox
DistComp
Weighted Sum& 
HomoNorm
T iterations
HomolP
Init
Enc
Centroids
AsstDistComp
Query
Sub-Query
Operations 
only for 
PRAG-II
Operations 
only for 
PRAG-I
Server
Cluster A
Cluster B, Same process as above A
Cluster C, Same process as above A
Embedding(Vi)
①
②
③
Update
Return
Top-k 
results
②
③
Enc
Enc
Enc
File
Fig. 2. Architecture of PRAG-I and PRAG-II. Note: Numbers in green circles
denote steps exclusive to PRAG-I, while numbers in brick-red circles indicate
steps specific to PRAG-II; the remaining steps are common to both schemes.
A. PRAG-I
The PRAG-I framework performs retrieval homomorphi-
cally on the cloud using CKKS, and uses a Chebyshev
polynomial approximation for ranking.
1) Detailed Protocols: We present the pseudocode for
Protocols ΠSetup, ΠRetrieval, and ΠUpdate in Section V-A1, and
Protocol ΠLocalRAG in Appendix C.
Setup Stage: Encrypted Upload and Index Construction.
As shown in Protocol 1, the client encrypts each vector
vi ∈V with its identifier IDi under pk to obtain ciphertexts cti.
CKKS parameters, including the polynomial modulus degree
N, the moduli chain qi, and the initial scaling ∆, are chosen
to match the multiplicative depth of the homomorphic inner-
product circuit. The client then uploads {cti} and evaluation
keys evk to the untrusted server, which stores them as a two-
level encrypted index I.
The server then runs encrypted K-means. It initializes
centroids by sampling C vectors and encrypting them as
{ctµ1, . . . , ctµC}. For T iterations, it computes homomorphic
inner products ctsj between each data point cti and all
centroids, applies ChebyApprox with scaling parameter τ
to obtain weights ctwj, accumulates weighted sums in each
partition Pj, and updates centroids via HomoNorm. Details
of HomoNorm are given in Appendix C.
Once clustering is complete, the encrypted centroids form
the cluster-level index Icluster. For the second level, the server
constructs an encrypted HNSW graph Gj for each cluster
by iteratively inserting assigned encrypted vectors using the
secure insertion procedure in Protocol 3. The full index I
combines both levels. Finally, encrypted centroids are returned
to the client and decrypted into plaintext cluster metadata
Cmeta, which contains centroids and semantic labels. Because
this metadata is aggregate, it does not reveal individual data
points and can be safely used for subsequent retrieval.
Retrieve Stage: Hierarchical and Fused Secure Re-
trieval. As shown in Protocol 2, retrieval uses a hierarchical
index and query transformation while keeping server-side
computation efficient. The process starts with client-side query
decomposition. The original query q is embedded into vq via
OpenAIEmbeddings (OpenAI Emb). Using plaintext cluster
Algorithm 1: Protocol ΠSetup
KwIn
: Plaintext vectors V, public key pk, evaluation keys evk,
parameters C, T, τ.
KwOut
: Encrypted index I at the server and encrypted centroids
{ctµj } returned to the client.
// Client-Side Encryption
1 CT V ←{(IDi, Enc(pk, vi)) | (IDi, vi) ∈V};
2 Upload CT V and evk to the server;
// Level-1: Encrypted Chebyshev-Weighted
K-means Clustering
3 Randomly initialize encrypted centroids {ctµ1, . . . , ctµC };
4 for t ←1 to T do
5
Initialize Pj.sum ←0 and Pj.count ←0 for all j ∈[C];
6
foreach (IDi, cti) ∈CT V do
7
Compute ctsj ←HomoIP(cti, ctµj ) for all j;
8
Compute ctwj ←ChebyApprox({ctsj }, τ);
9
Update Pj.sum ←Pj.sum + cti · ctwj and
Pj.count ←Pj.count + ctwj ;
10
end
11
for j ←1 to C do
12
if Pj.count ̸= 0 then
13
ctµj ←HomoNorm(Pj.sum, Pj.count);
14
end
15
end
16 end
17 Store encrypted centroids as Icluster;
// Level-2: Encrypted HNSW Construction
18 for j ←1 to C do
19
Construct encrypted HNSW graph Gj using SecureInsert;
20 end
21 I ←(Icluster, IHNSW);
22 Send encrypted centroids {ctµj } to the client and output I;
metadata Cmeta, which is decrypted from the server during
setup, the client computes similarities between vq and cluster
centroids, then selects the top-Cprobe clusters Jbest for semantic
routing without revealing query content to the server.
To improve recall, the client performs query fusion within
each selected cluster. For each cluster j∗, it retrieves the
semantic label from Cmeta and uses a local LLM via
LLM.Decompose to generate ksub diverse sub-queries tai-
lored to the cluster topic and original query. Each sub-query is
embedded by OpenAI Emb, encrypted into ctsub, and paired
with its target cluster ID. The encrypted sub-query set is sent
to the server with the desired top-k parameter.
On the server side, retrieval is targeted and efficient. For
each encrypted sub-query ctsub and designated cluster j∗, the
server retrieves the corresponding encrypted HNSW graph
Gj∗from IHNSW. It then runs greedy search from entry point
ep to find top-k nearest neighbors in the encrypted domain
using homomorphic distance computations. Partial results con-
taining candidate identifiers and scores are aggregated and
returned to the client. Restricting search to selected clusters
and parallelizing sub-queries reduces server overhead while
preserving homomorphic security. The client then fuses and
reranks aggregated results in Appendix 4 to produce final
context.
To reduce access-pattern leakage during retrieval, PRAG-I
further augments the above search process with randomized
protection mechanisms. First, for each real encrypted sub-
query, the client injects a ρ-fraction of dummy traversal
requests that target randomly selected clusters and trigger ran-
dom walks of matched depth in the corresponding encrypted

7
Algorithm 2: Protocol ΠSecureRetrieval
KwIn
: Query q, top-k parameter K, parameters (Cprobe, ksub),
client metadata Cmeta, and scaling parameter τ.
KwOut
: Aggregated encrypted retrieval results.
// Client-Side Query Decomposition
1 vq ←OpenAI Emb(q);
2 Compute similarity scores between vq and cluster centroids using
Cmeta;
3 Select top-Cprobe clusters and denote them as Jbest;
// Encrypted Sub-query Generation
4 EncSubQueries ←∅;
5 foreach j∗∈Jbest do
6
Retrieve semantic label from Cmeta[j∗];
7
Generate ksub sub-queries via LLM.Decompose;
8
foreach qsub in generated sub-queries do
9
vsub ←OpenAI Emb(qsub);
10
ctsub ←Enc(pk, vsub);
11
Append (ctsub, j∗) to EncSubQueries;
12
end
13 end
14 Send EncSubQueries and K to the server;
// Server-Side Targeted Encrypted Search
15 AggregatedResults ←∅;
16 foreach (ctsub, j∗) ∈EncSubQueries do
17
Retrieve encrypted HNSW graph Gj∗;
18
Perform greedy encrypted ANN search on Gj∗with ctsub and
obtain top-k identifiers;
19
Append (j∗, PartialResults) to AggregatedResults;
20 end
21 return AggregatedResults;
HNSW graphs. In addition, each real traversal is padded to a
fixed observable length ℓmax by appending random neighbor
visits, so the server observes a mixture of real and dummy
paths with aligned lengths rather than a clean trace of the true
greedy search. Second, the encrypted index is periodically re-
encrypted and re-clustered after every epoch of E queries, us-
ing fresh ciphertext randomness, fresh K-means initialization,
and freshly rebuilt HNSW layers. This prevents the server from
accumulating stable long-term traversal statistics over a fixed
graph. Together, these protections are part of the operational
design of PRAG-I, while their formal leakage model and
security proof are deferred to Section VI-A3.
Update
Stage:
Secure
Data
Insertion
and
Dele-
tion. As shown in Protocol 3, this protocol supports dy-
namic encrypted-index updates for evolving datasets. The
SecureInsert procedure adapts standard HNSW insertion
to homomorphic encryption. For a new encrypted node
(IDnew, ctnew), a random maximum layer L is assigned fol-
lowing HNSW probabilistic layering. From the top layer
down to L + 1, the protocol performs a preliminary search:
from entry point ep, it retrieves candidate neighbors and
computes encrypted distances ctdk via homomorphic inner
products. Because discrete selection is incompatible with HE,
ChebyApprox assigns Chebyshev-derived weights ctwk based
on distances, with τ controlling the approximation scale. The
next entry point is computed as a weighted sum of candidates,
yielding a continuous approximation for descent.
From layer L downward to the base layer (0), a more
thorough greedy search is conducted with depth controlled by
a depth heuristic, denoted as Deph to find potential neighbors.
Again, Chebyshev-derived weights are applied to these neigh-
Algorithm 3: Protocol ΠSecureUpdate
KwIn
: Encrypted HNSW graph G, new encrypted node
(IDnew, ctnew), scaling parameter τ, search depth Deph,
and maximum degree M.
KwOut
: Updated encrypted HNSW graph G.
// Procedure SecureInsert
1 L ←RandomLayer(), ep ←G.entryPoint,
topLayer ←G.maxLayer;
2 for l = topLayer, . . . , L + 1 do
3
N ←Neighbors(G, ep, l);
4
Compute ctdk ←HomoIP(ctnew, N[k]);
5
Compute ctwk ←ChebyApprox({ctdk}, τ);
6
ep ←P
k ctwk · N[k];
7 end
8 for l = min(L, topLayer), . . . , 0 do
9
N ←GreedySearch(G, ctnew, ep, Deph, l);
10
W ←ChebyApprox(N, τ);
11
N ′ ←WeightedTopM(N, W, M);
12
G.link(ctnew, N ′, l);
13
ep ←P W · N ′;
14 end
15 Output updated graph G;
// Procedure SecureDelete
16 ctnode ←FindNodeByID(I, IDdel);
17 if ctnode is found then
18
Mark node as deleted using a secure flag; keep it for routing;
19 end
20 return deletion status;
bors, and the top M are selected using a weighted ranking
WeightedTopM to establish bidirectional links in the graph.
The entry point for the next layer is updated as a weighted
aggregate.
The SecureDelete procedure addresses deletion without
compromising security. Rather than physically removing a
node, which could disrupt graph connectivity and potentially
leak information through observable changes in access pat-
terns, the protocol locates the encrypted node by its ID and
sets a deleted flag. This ”mark-and-sweep” strategy allows the
node to remain as a routing point, ensuring ongoing search
efficiency.
B. PRAG-II
To reduce approximation errors from the Chebyshev poly-
nomial surrogate, we introduce an interactive variant of our
PRAG. In this mode, the cloud computes all distance-related
operations homomorphically, while the client partially de-
crypts intermediate encrypted distances, such as cluster dis-
tances or HNSW layer candidates, to decide the next nav-
igation step. This design preserves the hierarchical greedy
structure of HNSW and achieves retrieval accuracy closely
approximating plaintext search, at the cost of multiple client-
server communication rounds. The preprocessing and final
RAG response phases are the same as those in the PRAG-
I, so they will not be described again in this subsection.
Interactive Setup. This procedure builds the encrypted two-
level index I on an untrusted server under an interactive
client-assisted protocol, sharing the same overall structure as
the PRAG-I index construction protocol ΠSetup but replacing
Chebyshev polynomial approximations with client-guided ex-
act decisions. The client-side encryption and upload of vectors
V to produce ciphertexts CT V remain identical.

8
On the server side, during each K-means iteration, the
process diverges: instead of using ChebyApprox for weighted
assignments, the server computes exact encrypted distances
from each cti to all centroids using HomoDist, which contex-
tually utilizes HomoIP to generate encrypted similarity scores
for precise client-side comparison, and sends these ciphertexts
to the client. The client decrypts them, identifies the nearest
cluster j∗in plaintext, and sends back only the cluster index.
The server then aggregates the assigned ciphertexts homo-
morphically and updates centroids via HomoNorm, which
essentially performs a homomorphic division ctsum/ctcount
using a polynomial approximation of the reciprocal function
x 7→1/x to compute the new centroid of the aggregated
vectors, mirroring the aggregation step in the PRAG-I but with
hard assignments.
After clustering, the construction of encrypted HNSW
graphs per cluster follows the interactive insertion procedure
described below, rather than the PRAG-I. Finally, the en-
crypted centroids are sent to the client for decryption into
plaintext metadata Cmeta, as in the PRAG-I. This achieves
identical clustering results to plaintext K-means without ap-
proximations, while preserving privacy, at the expense of
O(NCT) communication rounds during indexing.
Interactive Retrieval. This phase extends the PRAG-I
retrieval protocol ΠSecureRetrieval into an interactive protocol
that removes Chebyshev polynomial approximations in favor
of exact client-side ranking decisions. The client-side query
preparation, including embedding q into vq and encrypting it
to ctq, is unchanged.
However, cluster routing differs: the server computes en-
crypted distances from ctq to all centroids and sends them to
the client, who decrypts and selects the top-Cprobe clusters in
plaintext, returning their indices. This replaces homomorphic
Chebyshev-weighted routing with exact client-side selection.
For each selected cluster, HNSW traversal is guided interac-
tively: at each layer, the server computes encrypted distances
from ctq to candidate nodes and sends them to the client, who
decrypts, selects the nearest entry point, or at lower layers
selects the top-M neighbors, and returns the choices. The
final layer-0 greedy search on the server produces exact top-k
candidates, matching plaintext HNSW behavior.
Interactive Update. To support dynamic updates, this ex-
tends the PRAG-I update protocol ΠSecureUpdate to an interac-
tive form, replacing Chebyshev weighting with client-assisted
exact selections. During insertion, layer assignment and entry
point initialization remain the same.
At each layer, the server computes encrypted distances from
the new ctnew to candidates using HomoDist and sends them
to the client, who decrypts and selects the nearest neighbor
as the next entry point or selects the top-M closest nodes for
linking, returning the encrypted indices. This ensures exact
HNSW topology without approximations. Deletion uses the
same non-interactive mark-and-sweep strategy: flagging the
node as deleted while keeping it for routing, with optional
offline reconstruction. Overall, this preserves the graph’s struc-
tural integrity under encryption, with client-guided decisions
adding communication but guaranteeing accuracy equivalent
to plaintext operations.
C. Operation-Error Estimation (OEE)
A key challenge in deploying CKKS-based retrieval systems
is managing computational noise and approximation errors.
As established in our contribution summary, retrieval quality
hinges on preserving the relative order of similarity scores
rather than achieving pointwise numeric accuracy. To formally
guarantee this property, we abstract the OEE mechanism intro-
duced earlier into a Ranking-Preserving Correctness Model.
This model provides a theoretical framework that quantifies
how homomorphic noise propagates through similarity com-
putations, and derives explicit bounds to ensure that ranking
inversions occur with negligible probability under properly
tuned CKKS parameters.
To make this dependency explicit, PRAG decomposes the
encrypted score of candidate di as
ˆsi = si + ξpoly
i
+ ξhe
i
+ ξpath
i
,
where si = ⟨q, di⟩is the true similarity, ξpoly
i
is the ap-
proximation error introduced by Chebyshev-based comparison
surrogates, ξhe
i
captures CKKS arithmetic noise from inner
products, rescaling, and rotations, and ξpath
i
captures path-
dependent accumulation caused by different traversal depths
or update paths. In PRAG-I, all three terms may appear; in
PRAG-II, client-assisted comparisons eliminate the dominant
comparison-approximation term for interactive decisions, leav-
ing CKKS arithmetic noise and path-dependent accumulation
as the main sources.
OEE shifts the correctness target from minimizing average
numerical error to preserving the margin between competing
candidates. Let q be a query and di, dj two documents with
true similarity gap δ = |⟨q, di⟩−⟨q, dj⟩|. Even if each
encrypted score has error less than δ/2, asymmetric noise or
approximation can still flip their order. Such ranking errors
break top-k retrieval and harm RAG output, but are invisible
to standard metrics such as mean square error (MSE).
Ranking is preserved if, whenever the true similarity gap
exceeds a margin ∆(where ∆depends on homomorphic noise
and approximation error), the encrypted retrieval maintains the
correct order with overwhelming probability. Concretely, for
documents di and dj, ranking is stable whenever:
|(ˆsi −ˆsj) −(si −sj)| ≤ϵOEE < ∆/2.
By choosing parameters so that the total perturbation is less
than ∆/2, PRAG ensures that ranking errors occur only
when documents are semantically indistinguishable, meaning
any ambiguity reflects true embedding similarity rather than
encryption-induced leakage.
OEE also reveals that noise is unevenly distributed across
phases. Table IV shows that online retrieval usually re-
quires only hundreds of independent inner-product evaluations,
whereas encrypted K-means and full index construction re-
quire millions to tens of millions. Thus, the dominant risk is
not one query overflowing the noise budget; it is that offline
construction determines the minimum CKKS parameter budget
needed for the whole system.
This phase-aware view directly guides mitigation. At the
cryptographic level, we choose a sufficiently large polynomial

9
TABLE IV
COMPARATIVE NOISE ANALYSIS OF OPERATIONS IN ENCRYPTED VECTOR SIMILARITY SEARCH
Operation
Inner Product Count
Order of Magnitude
Noise Characteristics
Single inner product
1
O(1)
Baseline unit (SIP)
Single query
C + Cprobe · L · log(M)
O(102)
Independent computations
Single HNSW insertion
L · Deph
O(102)
Independent comparisons
K-means (one iteration)
N · C
O(106) −O(107)
Dominant noise source
Full index construction
T · |D| · C + |D| · L · Deph
O(107) −O(108)
Critical bottleneck
modulus degree N, an adequate ciphertext moduli chain {qi},
and a calibrated scaling factor ∆scale so that the full con-
struction circuit fits within the available noise budget. At the
algorithmic level, we limit K-means to a small number of iter-
ations and adopt conservative HNSW construction parameters
such as a smaller Deph. These choices reduce multiplicative
depth and operation count in the dominant offline phase while
keeping retrieval quality acceptable. Additional derivations are
provided in Appendix D.
VI. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
We first present a formal security analysis under the honest-
but-curious adversary model. Building on CKKS IND-CPA
security and game-based proofs, we establish view indistin-
guishability and analyze data privacy, query privacy, and result
privacy, including ranking confidentiality, for both operating
modes, PRAG-I and PRAG-II. We then compare PRAG’s
theoretical complexity with representative SSR schemes in
Table V.
A. Security Analysis
1) Security Definitions and Leakage Definitions: We for-
malize PRAG’s security along two dimensions. The first is
data-level security, which protects ciphertext contents. The
second is access-pattern-level security, which bounds the
information leaked through observable traversal patterns. Let
A denote the honest-but-curious cloud server adversary with
polynomial-time capabilities.
Definition
VI.1
(IND-CPA
Security
of
CKKS).
The
CKKS scheme is IND-CPA secure if for any polynomial-
time
adversary
A,
the
advantage
AdvIND-CPA
A
=
|Pr[A(Enc(m0)) = 0] −Pr[A(Enc(m1)) = 1]| is negligible
in the security parameter λ, where m0, m1 are chosen by A.
This provides the foundational guarantee that all encrypted
embeddings, queries, similarity scores, and rankings are se-
mantically hidden.
Definition VI.2 (Leakage Function). The permitted leakage
L characterizes the access-pattern information observable by
the server. However, PRAG introduces random access per-
turbation to suppress the fidelity of this leakage. Formally,
let Ltrue denote the true access pattern and Lobs denote the
observed perturbed access pattern. PRAG ensures that Lobs is
a noisy version of Ltrue. The perturbation is parameterized by
the obfuscation rate ρ, which denotes the fraction of dummy
accesses, and by the re-encryption epoch E:
L = Lobs = Perturb(Ltrue; ρ, E).
(3)
The perturbed leakage includes: the noisy sequence of ac-
cessed nodes in encrypted HNSW graphs and the perturbed
set of probed clusters, mixed with dummy accesses. Notably,
L does not include plaintext values, similarity scores, or exact
rankings. We do not explicitly include update-stage leakage
in L, as index updates are treated as offline operations with
observable effects limited to local index connectivity.
Definition VI.3 (Semantic Confidentiality under Perturbed
Leakage). PRAG achieves semantic confidentiality under
perturbed leakage if: (1) Data-level: A cannot distinguish
plaintext embeddings, queries, or result rankings with non-
negligible advantage; (2) Access-pattern-level: the server ob-
serves only the perturbed leakage L induced by random access
perturbation, and any graph reconstruction attempt is therefore
limited to what can be inferred from this noisy view. Formally,
for any two datasets V0, V1 and queries q0, q1 of equal size, the
views ViewA(V0, q0) and ViewA(V1, q1) are computationally
indistinguishable, conditioned on equivalent perturbed leakage
L(V0, q0) = L(V1, q1).
This two-tier definition captures four properties: data pri-
vacy through IND-CPA indistinguishability of ciphertexts,
query privacy through indistinguishability of query intents,
result privacy through indistinguishability of scores and rank-
ings, and access-pattern mitigation through perturbed leakage.
To formalize how OEE masks fine-grained ranking infor-
mation, let si = ⟨q, di⟩be true cosine similarities and let the
server observe approximations s′
i = si+ξi, where |ξi| ≤ϵOEE.
Define the ranking ambiguity margin ∆:= 2ϵOEE.
Lemma VI.4 (Ranking Indistinguishability under OEE). For
any two documents di, dj, if |si −sj|
<
∆, then the
cloud server cannot determine their relative order with non-
negligible advantage.
The lemma states that OEE converts sufficiently small score
gaps into ranking ambiguity, so close candidates do not reveal
stable semantic orderings to the server. The full proof is
deferred to Appendix B.
2) Security of PRAG-I and PRAG-II: In PRAG-I, all op-
erations are performed homomorphically using Chebyshev
polynomial approximations to replace comparisons.
Theorem VI.5. Assuming CKKS is IND-CPA secure and the
OEE is bounded such that ranking distortion is limited by an
ambiguity margin ∆, PRAG-I achieves semantic confidentiality
with leakage L.
Proof sketch. The proof uses a standard hybrid sequence. We
first replace real encryptions with encryptions of random vec-

10
TABLE V
COMPLEXITY OF SECURE SIMILARITY SEARCH SCHEMES
Scheme
Setup
Retrieval
Update
Communication
SESR [25]
O(|D| · d log |D|)
O(d log |D|)
NA
O(d log |D|)
PDQ [26]
O(|D| · d)
O(|D| · d)
NA
O(|D| · d)
MSecKNN [28]
O(|D| · d)
O(|D|(d + log2 |D|))
O(d)
O(|D|(d + log2 |D|))
FSkNN [29]
O(|D| · d)
O(|D|(d + k))
O(d)
O(|D| · k)
PRAG
O(|D| · d log |D|)
O(d)
O(d)
O(d)
Notations: |D|: dataset size; d: vector dimension; k: top-k retrieval parameter (FSkNN).
tors and then simulate homomorphic additions and multiplica-
tions on these random ciphertexts; IND-CPA security of CKKS
makes both transitions negligible. We then use Lemma VI.4
to show that Chebyshev-driven routing decisions reveal only
ambiguity-preserving order information when score gaps fall
inside the OEE margin. Finally, a simulator that depends only
on perturbed leakage L reproduces the observed paths and
intermediates, so the adversary’s final view is independent
of the underlying plaintexts up to negligible advantage. A
complete proof is given in Appendix B.
PRAG-II uses client-assisted decryption to resolve com-
parisons, introducing bounded additional leakage of local
orderings.
Theorem VI.6. Assuming CKKS is IND-CPA secure, PRAG-
II achieves semantic confidentiality with leakage L extended
to include revealed orderings of interacted candidates.
Proof sketch. The hybrid structure is the same as in The-
orem 1 for all non-interactive ciphertext operations. The
difference is that the simulator must additionally reproduce
the bounded local orderings revealed by client-assisted com-
parisons, such as selected clusters or candidate neighbors
at a given HNSW layer. Because the server observes only
the choices and not the decrypted values themselves, these
interactions can be simulated as orderings over candidate
sets whose sizes match the protocol, yielding only localized
leakage and no exposure of global plaintext rankings. Thus,
PRAG-II preserves data and query privacy while incurring
only the explicitly modeled ordering leakage. The full proof
appears in Appendix B.
3) Proof of Access-Pattern Mitigation: While Theorems 1
and 2 establish data-level semantic confidentiality, the server
can still observe retrieval paths over encrypted HNSW graphs.
In PRAG-I, this leakage is operationally mitigated by query
obfuscation with dummy traversals and by periodic re-
encryption/re-clustering across epochs, as described in Sec-
tion V-A. We now formalize the security of this mitigation
and bound the adversary’s graph-reconstruction advantage.
We now formally prove that the combination of query
obfuscation and periodic re-encryption effectively defends
against Leakage-Abuse Attacks (LAAs).
Theorem VI.7 (LAA Resilience). Let A be a PPT adversary
that observes QE queries within a single re-encryption epoch
of length E. Under PRAG’s access-pattern mitigation with
obfuscation rate ρ and epoch length E, the adversary’s ad-
vantage in reconstructing the HNSW graph topology satisfies:
Advgraph-recon
A
≤
QE
(1 + ρ) · |D| + negl(λ).
(4)
Proof sketch. The analysis again proceeds by hybrids. First,
dummy traversals are computationally indistinguishable from
real traversals because both execute the same encrypted op-
erations over ciphertext nodes; thus the adversary cannot
reliably separate them. Second, periodic re-encryption and
re-clustering make different epochs statistically independent,
so graph evidence cannot be accumulated indefinitely across
epochs. Finally, recovering an edge requires observing it
inside a real traversal, whose expected count is diluted by
both the dataset size and the obfuscation factor, yielding the
bound
QE
(1+ρ)|D| + negl(λ). The detailed proof is deferred to