Training a General Purpose Automated Red Teaming Model
Aishwarya Padmakumar and Leon Derczynski and Traian Rebedea and Christopher Parisien
NVIDIA
{apadmakumar, lderczynski, trebedea, cparisien}@nvidia.com
Abstract
Automated methods for red teaming LLMs are
an important tool to identify LLM vulnerabil-
ities that may not be covered in static bench-
marks, allowing for more thorough probing.
They can also adapt to each specific LLM to dis-
cover weaknesses unique to it. Most current au-
tomated red teaming methods are intended for
tackling safety and content moderation. Thus,
they make use of content safety models as eval-
uators and optimize for circumventing them,
and as such, have not been tested with other
adversarial intents not typically captured by
these. We propose a pipeline for training a red
teaming model that can generalize to arbitrary
adversarial goals, including objectives it has
not been directly trained on, and that does not
depend on the existence of a pre-existing evalu-
ator available at training time. We demonstrate
that finetuning small models, such as Qwen3-
8B, using this pipeline results in a substantial
improvement in their ability to generate attacks
for both in and out of domain adversarial goals.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) show strong per-
formance in a wide range of Natural Language
Processing tasks which has led to a substantial
amount of interactions between lay users and LLM-
based general purpose chatbots (Chatterji et al.,
2025) as well as the development and integration
of tools that make use of LLMs across different in-
dustries including software development, scientific
research, content creation and marketing, human
resources, finance, and legal domains among oth-
ers (Chkirbene et al., 2024).
As LLMs are deployed to a wide number of
users, it becomes more important to identify and
appropriately mitigate risks and undesirable be-
haviors associated with LLMs through a multi-
faceted approach, including both explicit training
to refuse undesirable requests (Ghosh et al., 2025;
Ji et al., 2024, 2023) and system-level guardrails in
the larger system making use of the LLM (Rebe-
dea et al., 2023).
A number of standardized
benchmarks have also been developed to systemat-
ically evaluate how often undesirable behaviors oc-
cur (Ghosh et al., 2025; Han et al., 2024; Wan et al.,
2024). These are accompanied by steps in the LLM
training process to address these behaviors, includ-
ing cleaning pretraining data using safety classi-
fiers (Maini et al.; Arnett et al., 2024), and creating
instruction following (Ghosh et al., 2025; Han et al.,
2024) and preference datasets for safety (Bai et al.,
2022; Dong et al., 2023) to be included in the cor-
responding stages of LLM training. These recipes
are usually part of the larger process of aligning
models with human objectives and intents. While
these have been shown to improve model behavior,
they can also have the side effect of saturating per-
formance on benchmarks (Zhou et al., 2023; Baner-
jee et al., 2024), making the task of identifying
unresolved issues a moving target. Additionally,
new jailbreak methods are continually identified,
demonstrating clever strategies to bypass defenses
of LLMs aligned for safe behavior (Yi et al., 2024).
This necessitates the need to perform red teaming
to identify unresolved vulnerabilities - explicitly
probing LLMs to elicit undesirable behavior (Gan-
guli et al., 2022).
Although human red teaming is highly desirable
as a key component of LLM evaluation, automated
red teaming methods are a useful complementary
tool that allows coverage of a wider range of situa-
tions and identifying examples that human annota-
tors may miss (Perez et al., 2022). Automated red
teaming methods can also adapt to the behavior of
a particular target LLM increasing the likelihood
of identifying vulnerabilities (Chen et al., 2025a;
Mehrotra et al., 2024).
Most prior works do not explicitly discuss in
advance a set of adversarial goals or specific be-
haviors they attempt to elicit, except to mention
1
arXiv:2604.23067v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

Figure 1: Pipeline to train the red teaming model for multiple adversarial goals: Given an adversarial goal, a seed
generation LLM is used to generate specific examples of the goal, ways to disguise the request so that LLMs do not
refuse it, and an evaluation rubric to check if the goal has been achieved in target responses. The specific examples
and disguise methods are used to create a diverse set of attack generation input prompts. At training time, the model
generates attacks given these prompts, which are passed to a target LLM, and then evaluated using the generated
evaluation rubric by a judge LLM to obtain the reward used for model updates.
that they are undesirable. The chosen adversar-
ial goals and behaviors that these works focus on
can be identified by examining what evaluation is
performed to determine whether a generated at-
tack succeeded against a target model. Typically,
many approaches make use of content safety judges
for this purpose, either employing a safety guard
model (Ghosh et al., 2025; Han et al., 2024) or
LLM judges with specific prompts. Content safety
models are trained to detect a wide range of unde-
sirable behavior from LLMs including offensive
content, sexual content, criminal activity, and unau-
thorized advice (Ghosh et al., 2025). However,
as LLMs are increasingly being trained for and
deployed in agentic applications, a growing num-
ber of potential undesirable behaviors, including
malware generation, data exfiltration, and exploita-
tion of known coding vulnerabilities, need to be
monitored. Thus, these behaviors have to be sys-
tematically optimized against and evaluated during
automated red teaming. Most current content safety
datasets include few if any training examples for
these situations. As a result of this, content safety
models and most existing red teaming methods us-
ing them are likely to perform poorly at detecting
these situations.
Additionally, when adversarial goals are not ex-
plicitly listed out as part of a red team model train-
ing and evaluation, it is unclear how many of these
goals are actually captured. Most prior works on
automated red teaming do not explicitly discuss
how a specific adversarial goal is specified in input
prompts used to elicit attack generation. In this
scenario, the extent to which different types of ad-
versarial responses are elicited by generated attacks
cannot be easily controlled and is typically not eval-
uated. For example, a red teaming model trained
with feedback from a typical content safety model
may end up only generating attacks that elicit pro-
fanity, even though the content safety model can
detect other types of undesirable behavior. This
limits the value of such a red team model when it is
put to use to evaluate a new LLM. In contrast, we
explicitly enumerate adversarial goals for which we
intend to test the ability of our model to generate
attacks, and explicitly cause the red team model to
be aware of some of these during training but leave
out specific behaviors for out of domain evaluation.
We introduce a setup that can be used to go
from novel adversarial goals specified in natural
language to effective attacks for these adversarial
goals. For example, we would like to support a
case where the red team model receives as input
a specific adversarial goal such as the generation
of malware or data exfiltration via URI variables,
and must generate attacks that would elicit these
behaviors from a target model. We further make
a key assumption: evaluators for these goals are
available at the time of evaluation of the red team
model but not at training time, so that the trained
model is able to generate effective attacks for novel
adversarial goals.
2

Figure 1 provides an overview of our proposed
method to finetune a red team model with Rein-
forcement Learning (RL) using a diverse set of
LLM-generated attack input prompts, and using a
reward function based on LLM-as-a-judge evalua-
tion customized to arbitrary adversarial goals. Our
work differs from prior works that use RL for red
teaming in the following ways:
• We focus on red teaming for a wide range
of adversarial goals beyond those typically
examined by content safety models.
• Our pipeline does not depend on a good eval-
uation method being available for the adver-
sarial goals at training time.
• We explicitly evaluate the ability of our
trained red team models to generate attacks
for adversarial goals not seen at training time,
where attack success at test time is measured
differently in comparison to training.
Additionally, while not necessarily an advantage,
we choose to experiment with an instruction tuned
LLM that has undergone safety training, not an
uncensored LLM, demonstrating that safety trained
LLMs can also be trained into effective red team
models.
We demonstrate that our proposed method im-
proves the ability of an instruction tuned LLM to
perform red teaming even on out of domain adver-
sarial goals not available during training.
2
Related Work
Red teaming or identifying adversarial attack
prompts that elicit undesirable behaviors from
LLMs is essential to identify weaknesses in LLMs
beyond those captured by static benchmarks (Gan-
guli et al., 2022). While human red teaming can
effectively harness human creativity and focus on
inputs that real users are likely to provide (Ganguli
et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2023), automated red team-
ing methods can be complementary by effectively
scaling to a large number of possible red teaming
prompts (Perez et al., 2022).
Automated red teaming methods range from
adaptive jailbreaking approaches to training custom
red teaming models that are rewarded for eliciting
undesired behaviors. The former include methods
that make use of genetic algorithms (Liu et al.,
2023), optimizing prompt suffixes based on the tar-
get LLM’s responses (Zou et al., 2023), or utilizing
LLMs to iteratively modify an adversarial prompt
to result in a successful attack (Mehrotra et al.,
2024; Samvelyan et al., 2024; Rahman et al., 2025).
For model-based red teaming, the basic setup is to
generate attacks using a custom red teaming model,
run them against a target LLM and use an evaluator
to determine whether the attack is successful (Perez
et al., 2022). Successful attacks can be identified
in a number of ways. The simplest is to generate a
large enough number of attacks from the red team-
ing model and filter them using the evaluator. More
sophisticated approaches improve the red teaming
model using the evaluator feedback through su-
pervised or reinforcement learning (Perez et al.,
2022). More recent methods attempt to augment
the reward function during training of the red team
model to result in more diverse outputs (Ge et al.,
2024; Chen et al., 2025b). Other works increase
the diversity of attack strategies identified in the
red teaming stage by mining attack tactics from in-
the-wild human interactions (Jiang et al., 2024b).
However, all of these works rely on content safety
classifiers as evaluators and are optimized only in
this context.
Content safety classifiers are trained to identify
a number of types of harmful responses such as
offensive, racist, and sexist responses, and indi-
cators of criminal activity and self harm (Ghosh
et al., 2025; Han et al., 2024; Markov et al., 2023).
However, as the capabilities of LLMs are expanded
and they are deployed to a wider range of appli-
cations, the types of malicious intents an adver-
sary may have grow over time. Some examples
of LLM vulnerabilities that arise with the increas-
ing focus on code generation capabilities of LLMs
include package hallucinations which can lead to
exploitable vulnerabilities (Krishna et al., 2025),
emitting non printable ANSI escape codes that can
interfere with a user’s terminal or be used to leak
data (Rehberger, 2024), or running code during
intermediate tool calls that exploit vulnerabilities
in commonly used packages (Pisu et al., 2024).
While some attempts have been made to develop
benchmarks to assess the vulnerability of LLMs
to some of these issues (Wan et al., 2024; Guo
et al., 2024), these are static benchmarks that may
be over-optimized for (Zhou et al., 2023; Banerjee
et al., 2024). This may result in a false sense of
security, as new types of malicious intents or attack
vectors that get identified over time require updated
versions of these benchmarks.
In this work, we build upon existing methods
3

that use RL to finetune red teaming models (Perez
et al., 2022) but expand beyond the traditional sce-
nario where the reward function is based on a con-
tent safety evaluator. We expand to both a wider
range of adversarial goals, and explore the case
where a good evaluator for the adversarial goal is
not available at training time, necessitating the use
of LLM-as-a-judge evaluations to obtain reward
scores.
3
Method
Figure 1 provides an overview of our pipeline to
train a red teaming model that can generate ef-
fective attacks for adversarial goals not seen dur-
ing training time. This includes an attack genera-
tion input prompt creation phase that uses a seed
generation LLM to diversify input prompts used
to generate attacks, and an evaluation rubric to
determine whether an adversarial goal has been
achieved. This evaluation rubric is then used a
part of a Reinforcement Learning (RL) process to
update the red teaming model.
3.1
Adversarial Goals
Most prior works on automated red team-
ing, whether they are adaptive jailbreaking ap-
proaches (Zou et al., 2023; Mehrotra et al., 2024;
Samvelyan et al., 2024; Rahman et al., 2025) or
training a custom red teaming model (Perez et al.,
2022; Chen et al., 2025a) do not explicitly discuss
an overall adversarial goal or specific behavior they
attempt to elicit, except to mention that it is an un-
desirable response. We believe it is important to
explicitly list out adversarial goals for which we
aim to generate attacks, and use the attack success
rate per specific goal as the evaluation measure
to ensure that our model provides both efficacy at
vulnerability detection and coverage over possible
goals for which attacks need to be generated.
For this work, we choose adversarial goals from
garak (Derczynski et al., 2024) - a popular open-
source framework for discovering vulnerabilities in
LLMs. garak consists of probes that use adversar-
ial prompts to elicit specific types of undesirable
behavior from LLMs and detectors that can analyze
an LLM response for a particular type of undesir-
able behavior. While many probes in garak contain
sets of adversarial prompts known to be generally
effective at eliciting the behavior in question, we
do not use these prompts. Our goal is to develop a
pipeline that can use natural language descriptions
of the adversarial goals the probes are trying to
achieve and generate adversarial prompts that can
elicit this type of behavior from target LLMs. We
use detectors from garak at evaluation time to ver-
ify that our generated adversarial prompts actually
produce the behavior in question, but in line with
our goal we do not make them available at training.
We select 2 sets of adversarial goals – in-domain
goals which are used during training (listed in Table
1), and a held-out set of goals only made available
for out-of-domain evaluation (see Table 2). Note
that some of these goals could be detected using
a typical content safety classifier – especially one
that provides categories of violation (Ghosh et al.,
2025). However, we do not make such a classifier
available at training time as we wish to ensure that
our model can generalize to novel adversarial goals.
We specifically select our out-of-domain goals for
the red team model evaluation to include adversar-
ial goals that are typically underrepresented or not
represented at all in content safety datasets. When
we perform out-of-domain evaluation, we consider
a generated attack successful against a target LLM
if the garak detector associated with the adver-
sarial behavior it is expected to elicit detects that
behavior in the response from the target LLM.
3.2
Reward Function
We wish to train a red teaming model using rein-
forcement learning without necessarily having ac-
cess to a strong evaluator for the adversarial goals
used during training. Hence, to obtain rewards,
we used LLM-as-a-judge with rubrics (Cook et al.,
2024) generated by a seed generation LLM for
each adversarial goal to determine whether gen-
erated adversarial attacks were successful. In our
experiments, we used rubrics generated by Qwen3-
235B-A22B (Qwen-Team, 2025). More details
about the rubric generation process are included in