Adversarial Co-Evolution of Malware and Detection Models: A Bilevel
Optimization Perspective
Olha Jureˇckov´a1
a, Martin Jureˇcek1
b, Matouˇs Koz´ak1
c and R´obert L´orencz1
d
1Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, Th´akurova 9, Prague, 16000, Czech Republic
{jurecolh, martin.jurecek, kozakmat, robert.lorencz}@fit.cvut.cz
Keywords:
Malware Detection, Adversarial Machine Learning, Bilevel Optimization, MAB-malware, Robustness,
Co-evolution, Reinforcement Learning.
Abstract:
Machine learning-based malware detectors are increasingly vulnerable to adversarial examples. Traditional
defenses, such as one-shot adversarial training, often fail against adaptive attackers who use reinforcement
learning to bypass detection. This paper proposes a robust defense framework based on bilevel optimiza-
tion, explicitly modeling the strategic interaction between a defender and an attacker as an adversarial co-
evolutionary process. We evaluate our approach using the MAB-malware framework against three distinct
malware families: Mokes, Strab, and DCRat. Our experimental results demonstrate that while standard clas-
sifiers and basic adversarial retraining often remain vulnerable, showing evasion rates as high as 90%, the
proposed bilevel optimization approach consistently achieves near-total immunity, reducing evasion rates to
0–1.89%. Furthermore, the iterative framework significantly increases the attacker’s query complexity, raising
the average cost of successful evasion by up to two orders of magnitude. These findings suggest that model-
ing the iterative cycle of attack and defense through bilevel optimization is essential for developing resilient
malware detection systems capable of withstanding evolving adversarial threats.
1
INTRODUCTION
The number of malicious files detected worldwide
continues to grow rapidly, with Kaspersky reporting
an average of 500,000 detections per day in 2025,
representing a 7% increase compared to the previous
year (Kaspersky, 2025). This pattern demonstrates the
growing complexity of contemporary malware as well
as the urgent need for cybersecurity approaches that
can effectively adapt to rapidly evolving threats.
Malware detection faces a fundamental security
challenge arising from the asymmetry between adap-
tive attackers and learning-based defenders. While
defenders rely on detection models trained on pre-
viously observed data, attackers can rapidly generate
new malware variants specifically designed to evade
these defenses. This problem is reflected in the litera-
ture, which reveals that no single detection approach
can identify all new-generation and sophisticated mal-
ware (Aslan and Samet, 2020).
a
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8858-4826
b
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6546-8953
c
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8329-7572
d
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5444-8511
In practice, attackers continuously adapt their
strategies, often matching or surpassing advances in
antivirus (AV) detection systems. Malware classifi-
cation thus operates in a fundamentally adversarial
environment, where binaries are deliberately modi-
fied to evade detection using techniques such as poly-
morphism, packing, and other obfuscation methods.
While adversarial machine learning explores eva-
sion strategies including reinforcement learning and
perturbation-based attacks (Koz´ak et al., 2024; Aryal
et al., 2024; Ban et al., 2024), these works largely fo-
cus on attacking fixed classifiers and do not capture
the strategic, sequential interaction between attackers
and defenders.
Malware detection remains an open challenge due
to persistent distribution shifts caused by evolving
malware and new benign software (Kaspersky Lab,
2020). Unlike static machine learning settings, this
environment requires continuous data collection and
periodic retraining.
However, the inherent latency
and costs associated with retraining create exploitable
windows where outdated models become vulnerable,
turning distribution shifts into a fundamental security
risk.
The primary contribution of this work lies in the
arXiv:2604.22569v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

formulation of malware detection as an iterative, co-
evolutionary game between an adaptive attacker and a
defender, modeled through a bilevel optimization per-
spective. Unlike traditional static defenses, we sys-
tematically explore the convergence properties and
long-term behavior of this interaction by employing
an iterative framework where the defender’s model
and the attacker’s strategies evolve in response to
each other.
We demonstrate that this strategic co-
adaptation, integrating adversarial samples from suc-
cessive attack rounds back into the training process,
not only identifies the fundamental limitations of stan-
dard one-shot adversarial training but also leads to a
practical equilibrium that significantly enhances de-
tection robustness and escalates the operational cost
for the attacker across diverse malware families.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows.
Section 2 reviews related work in adversar-
ial malware generation, and game-theoretic modeling
of security problems. Section 3 provides the neces-
sary background on adversarial malware generation.
Section 4 details our research methodology, explain-
ing the iterative co-evolutionary process and the eval-
uation framework. Section 5 introduces our game-
theoretic framework and formulates the interaction
between the attacker and the defender as a bilevel
optimization problem. Section 6 presents the exper-
imental results, including the analysis of convergence
and exploitability in the proposed setting.
Finally,
Section 7 concludes the paper and outlines directions
for future work.
2
RELATED WORK
This section reviews key research on security games
in malware detection, adversarial machine learning,
and adversarial classification that has influenced the
development of our framework.
Several studies have examined adversarial mal-
ware generation to challenge machine learning–based
classifiers.
In (Koz´ak and Jureˇcek, 2023), the au-
thors propose combining multiple generators, with
the random AMG followed by MAB-Malware com-
bination achieving the highest evasion rate of 15.9%
against leading antivirus products.
In a comple-
mentary study (Louth´anov´a et al., 2024), the au-
thors evaluate five generators, PartialDOS, Full-
DOS, GAMMA padding, GAMMA section-injection,
and Gym-malware, demonstrating that the reinforce-
ment learning–based Gym-malware generator gener-
ates samples most efficiently, averaging 5.73 seconds
per sample.
The authors of (Aryal et al., 2024) provide a com-
prehensive survey of adversarial attacks and defenses
in malware analysis, highlighting the limitations of
current approaches and the vulnerability of machine
learning detectors. Similarly, Suciu et al. (Suciu et al.,
2019) show that adversarial attacks are less effective
on models trained with large datasets, while archi-
tectures like MalConv, which lack positional feature
encoding, remain particularly susceptible to append-
based attacks, offering insights into the generalization
and practical effectiveness of adversarial malware ex-
amples. Together, these works underscore the chal-
lenges of static classifiers and single-strategy attacks,
motivating defense mechanisms such as our security
game framework, which anticipates adaptive, strate-
gic attackers and accounts for coordinated, multi-
family evasion strategies.
Stackelberg Security Games (SSGs) offer a prin-
cipled framework for modeling such strategic inter-
actions. Wilczy´nski et al. (Wilczy´nski et al., 2016)
provide a comprehensive overview of SSG models,
applications in physical and cyber security, and com-
putational methods for finding optimal strategies. In
(Sinha et al., 2018), the authors review over a decade
of SSG research, emphasizing algorithmic advance-
ments, modeling improvements, and practical deploy-
ments, while highlighting challenges such as uncer-
tainty, resource constraints, and dynamic attacker be-
havior.
Complementing these works, the authors of (Drit-
soula et al., 2017) model adversarial classification
as a nonzero-sum game, where a defender and at-
tacker strategically interact over class 1 data while
class 0 data remain random. Their analysis of Nash
equilibria shows that attackers tend to mimic normal
behavior, defenders should randomize classification
rules, and optimal strategies often rely on a small set
of threshold-based classifiers. Together, these stud-
ies provide a strong foundation for designing robust,
game-theoretic defenses against adaptive and strate-
gic malware attackers, motivating our security game
framework.
The authors of (Zhuang et al., 2025) propose two
realistic threat models, M-TBA and AM-TBA, to
characterize black-box adversarial behaviors with dif-
ferent levels of adaptability under traffic-space con-
straints.
They present NashAE, a game-theoretic
ensemble malware detector that achieves robustness
by approximating a Nash equilibrium and modeling
the attacker–defender interaction as a minimax game.
Since the minimax game has no closed-form solution
and cannot be efficiently handled by typical gradient-
based methods, they decompose it into two related
Markov Decision Processes and solve them using
Bayesian optimization to obtain an efficient and re-

sponsive solution. They further evaluate their pro-
posed attack and defense framework on two encrypted
malware traffic datasets using ten detection strategies
under both M-TBA and AM-TBA settings.
In (Ebrahimi et al., 2022), the authors propose a
game-theoretic framework for malware detection us-
ing adversarial reinforcement learning. The interac-
tion between the malware detector and an adaptive
attacker is represented by a minimax optimization
game, with adversarial malware variants developed
using a reinforcement learning-based attack policy to
improve robustness. The approach alternates between
strengthening the attacker and improving detector re-
silience, and it is tested on a 33.2 GB real-world mal-
ware dataset collected from VirusTotal1.
3
BACKGROUND
This section establishes the technical foundations of
our study. We first formalize adversarial attacks on
Portable Executable (PE) files2, emphasizing the con-
straints of functionality preservation. Subsequently,
we describe the MAB-malware framework, a rein-
forcement learning-based agent used to simulate an
adaptive attacker capable of discovering optimal eva-
sion strategies.
3.1
Adversarial Attacks on PE Files
The objective of an adversarial attack in the malware
domain is to transform a malicious binary x ∈X into
an adversarial sample xadv = x+δ, where δ represents
a sequence of perturbations. In the context of feature-
based detection, let φ : X →Rn be a mapping function
(e.g., EMBER) that extracts a feature vector z = φ(x).
An adversarial sample is successful if f(φ(x + δ)) =
benign, while the original label is f(φ(x)) = malware.
Unlike adversarial examples in continuous do-
mains such as computer vision, perturbations in the
Portable Executable (PE) space are constrained by the
requirement of semantic integrity. As emphasized in
(Koz´ak et al., 2024), any modification δ must result in
a valid binary that remains executable and preserves
its original malicious payload. Formally, this restricts
the perturbation to a discrete action space S(x), such
that:
xadv = x+δ
s.t.
δ ∈S(x) and Sem(x) = Sem(xadv),
(1)
1https://virustotal.com
2https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/de
bug/pe-format
where Sem(·) represents the functional behavior of
the program.
The fundamental purpose of these adversarial
samples is to probe and exploit the decision bound-
aries of machine learning models.
By mimicking
the statistical properties of benign software, such as
through section injection or import table manipula-
tion, these samples expose the ”blind spots” of a clas-
sifier, forcing it to rely on non-robust features that are
easily susceptible to strategic manipulation.
3.2
MAB-malware
The MAB-Malware approach (Song et al., 2020)
leverages reinforcement learning to generate adver-
sarial malware samples by modeling the attack pro-
cess as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem. Its ob-
jective is to discover a small subset of binary trans-
formations that leads a target classifier to incorrectly
classify malicious inputs as benign. The procedure
consists of two main stages:
(1) an exploration stage, where the MAB agent se-
quentially selects and applies candidate macro-
and micro-level transformations until either eva-
sion is achieved or a predefined modification bud-
get is reached, and
(2) a refinement stage, during which individual trans-
formations are systematically re-evaluated and
discarded if their removal does not compromise
the evasion outcome.
Because the MAB framework assumes indepen-
dence among actions (i.e., no explicit ordering or in-
teraction constraints), this subsequent pruning step
can effectively reduce the number of applied modi-
fications while maintaining successful evasion.
Representative transformations include append-
ing benign content (e.g., overlays or new sections),
inserting or renaming sections, nullifying certifi-
cate or debug-related fields, altering optional header
checksums, and applying semantics-preserving code
changes. In our experiments, MAB-Malware was em-
ployed to craft adversarial samples targeting a classi-
fier trained on features from EMBER dataset (Ander-
son and Roth, 2018).
4
METHODOLOGY
The goal of this work is to systematically compare
malware detection performance under three different
approaches: (1) a standard machine learning clas-
sifier (malware detector) trained on non-adversarial
data, (2) the same classifier subsequently retrained on

adversarial samples generated using MAB-malware,
and (3) a classifier optimized via bilevel optimization,
which explicitly models the interaction between the
attacker and the defender.
4.1
Data Preparation and Experiment
(1)
At the beginning, the dataset is split into three dis-
joint subsets: the training set Dtrain, the validation set
Dval, and the test set Dtest. All subsets contain original
(non-adversarial) malware binaries as well as benign
binaries.
The first experiment consists of training a stan-
dard machine learning classifier, Random Forest, ex-
clusively on non-adversarial samples from Dtrain. The
validation set Dval is used for hyperparameter tun-
ing of Random Forest. The final performance and
robustness of the model are evaluated using accu-
racy, recall, and precision on Dtest. During testing,
the model is also exposed to samples modified using
MAB-malware to establish a baseline level of robust-
ness against adversarial attacks. The test set remains
fixed across all experiments (1), (2), and (3), and is
never used during training or adversarial sample gen-
eration to ensure objective evaluation.
4.2
Adversarial Training Inclusion –
Experiment (2)
In the second experiment, we use the trained model
from Experiment (1) as the target classifier for MAB-
malware. The malware samples from Dtrain are modi-
fied using MAB-malware with the objective of gener-
ating adversarial samples that evade detection by the
target model.
The resulting augmented dataset Dtrain
adv , which
consists of both original and adversarial samples (all
labeled correctly as malware), is used to retrain the
classifier from Experiment (1). The resulting more
robust model is then evaluated again using accuracy,
recall, and precision on the unchanged test set Dtest.
4.3
Bilevel Optimization and Dynamic
Game – Experiment (3)
The third and most complex experiment employs
bilevel optimization to simulate a strategic interaction
between the defender and the attacker. Careful data
handling is essential to preserve evaluation integrity.
Initialization:
The defender trains an initial
model on Dtrain (as in Experiment (1)).
Initial Attack:
The attacker applies MAB-
malware to samples from Dtrain using the initial
model as the target classifier. This produces the first
set of successful adversarial samples (Dtrain
adv )0 (as in
Experiment (2)).
Iterative Cycle (for i = 1 to Max iter):
• Defender: The defender retrains the classifier us-
ing the original dataset Dtrain together with ad-
versarial samples generated in previous iterations
(Dtrain
adv )j, where j ≤i−1. All samples retain cor-
rect labels, meaning adversarial samples are still
labeled as malware.
• Attacker: MAB-malware is applied again to the
original malware samples from Dtrain, but now
using the updated classifier as the target model.
This produces a new set of adversarial samples
(Dtrain
adv )i, reflecting the attacker’s adaptation to the
current defense.
After completing the iterations (with Max iter de-
termined empirically), the final optimized model is
evaluated on Dtest. The key difference from previ-
ous experiments is that the target classifier evolves in
each iteration, forcing the defender to learn more ro-
bust parameters that are not easily circumvented in
subsequent attacker steps.
The overall bilevel optimization procedure is sum-
marized in Algorithm 1.
Input: Training dataset Dtrain, maximum
iterations Max iter
Output: Optimized classifier f ∗
Initialization:
Train initial classifier f0 on Dtrain
(Dtrain
adv )0 ←MAB-malware(f0,Dtrain)
for i = 1 to Max iter do
Defender step:
Dtrain
aug ←Dtrain ∪Si−1
j=0(Dtrain
adv )j
fi ←Train(Dtrain
aug )
Attacker step:
(Dtrain
adv )i ←MAB-malware(fi,Dtrain)
end
return fMax iter
Algorithm 1: Bilevel Optimization for Adversarial Mal-
ware Generation
While the assumption that the attacker has full ac-
cess to the target model fi corresponds to a white-box
attack scenario, it allows us to evaluate the defender’s
robustness under the worst-case conditions, following
Kerckhoffs’s principle. This ensures that the resulting
defense boundary is resilient even against highly in-
formed adversaries.

4.4
Final Evaluation
In the final evaluation, we assess the detection perfor-
mance of the models from all three experimental sce-
narios. To ensure a comprehensive assessment of both
classification quality and security, each model is eval-
uated on two distinct datasets: the clean test set (con-
taining only original, non-adversarial samples) and
the adversarial test set (containing samples actively
manipulated by the MAB-malware agent to evade de-
tection).
At each step, the target classifier used by the
MAB-malware agent during the evaluation phase cor-
responds exactly to the most recently trained defender
model from the respective experiment. All experi-
ments are conducted independently for each malware
family (Mokes, Strab, and DCRat), resulting in a sys-
tematic comparison of the three defensive approaches
across different adversarial behaviors. All experimen-
tal settings are evaluated using the Random Forest ar-
chitecture to maintain consistency in the comparison
of the defensive strategies.
5
GAME-THEORETIC AND
BILEVEL FORMULATION
The interaction between a defender (malware detec-
tor) and an adaptive attacker (MAB-malware gen-
erator) can be formalized through the lens of game
theory, specifically as a bilevel optimization prob-
lem.
This framework allows us to distinguish be-
tween static defenses (Experiment 1), simple reactive
retraining (Experiment 2), and strategic co-evolution
(Experiment 3).
5.1
Formal Framework
Let fθ : X →Y be a classifier parameterized by θ ∈Θ,
representing the defender’s detection model. In this
work, the interaction is modeled as a strategic game
where the defender aims to correctly identify mal-
ware, while the role of the adaptive attacker is realized
by the MAB-malware framework. The attacker seeks
functionality-preserving transformations δ ∈S(x) to
maximize the probability of evasion. This strategic
interaction leads to the following bilevel formulation:
min
θ∈Θ
1
|Dtrain|
∑
(x,y)∈Dtrain
[L(fθ(x+δ∗(θ)),y)]
(2)
s.t. δ∗(θ) ∈arg max
δ∈S(x)Latk(fθ(x+δ),y),
(3)
where fθ is the classifier parameterized by θ within
the parameter space Θ. The formulation seeks to min-
imize the average loss over all samples (x,y) in the
training set Dtrain. The functions L and Latk represent
the loss functions for the defender and the attacker, re-
spectively. Specifically, Latk is defined such that it is
maximized when the classifier fθ misclassifies a mali-
cious sample as benign, representing a successful eva-
sion. The set S(x) defines the space of functionality-
preserving transformations available for a given sam-
ple x, from which the attacker chooses an optimal per-
turbation δ∗.
The inner problem represents the attacker’s best
response δ∗(θ) to a fixed model θ, while the outer
problem represents the defender’s quest for parame-
ters θ that are robust to that optimal response.
5.2
Modeling the Three Experimental
Scenarios
The methodology described in Section 4 maps di-
rectly to different approximations of this game-
theoretic equilibrium:
1. Baseline (Exp 1): This represents a non-strategic
defender. The defender assumes δ = 0, solving
only the outer minimization on Dtrain without con-
sidering the inner maximization.
2. Adversarial Retraining (Exp 2): This is a one-
step reactive defense. The defender first solves
the inner maximization against the baseline model
fθ0 to generate (Dtrain
adv )0, then performs a sin-
gle update to θ by training on the augmented set
Dtrain ∪(Dtrain
adv )0.
3. Bilevel IBR (Exp 3): This represents the strategic
defender. It approximates the full bilevel solution
through Iterative Best-Response (IBR) dynam-
ics.
5.3
Iterative Best-Response Dynamics
As detailed in Algorithm 1, the solution to the
bilevel problem is approximated through a sequence
of strategic interactions over i = 1,...,Max iter. At
each iteration i, the dynamics are defined as follows:
• Attacker Step: The attacker utilizes the MAB-
malware framework to solve the inner maximiza-
tion problem against the current defender’s model
fi:
(Dtrain
adv )i = {x+δ | δ ≈arg max
δ∈S(x)Latk(fi(x+δ),y)}.
(4)
• Defender Step: The defender updates the model
by minimizing the average loss over the cumula-

tive history of all preceding attacks:
fi+1 = Train
 
Dtrain ∪
i[
j=0
(Dtrain
adv )j
!
.
(5)
This iterative cycle aims to reach a practical ε-
Nash Equilibrium, where the defender’s model f ∗is
optimized against the most effective adversarial sam-
ples, and the attacker’s success is minimized. The
equilibrium is reached when the iterative updates to fi
no longer yield a significant reduction in the evasion
rate, effectively terminating the co-evolutionary pro-
cess. Given the discrete nature of the PE file transfor-
mation space S(x), we monitor convergence through
the stability of the evasion rate across successive iter-
ations.
6
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section details our experimental findings. First,
we describe the dataset and define the metrics for
classification and robustness. Next, we present and
analyze the empirical results for the Mokes, Strab,
and DCRat families across all three defensive strate-
gies. Finally, we provide a comparative discussion
highlighting the effectiveness of the bilevel optimiza-
tion framework in neutralizing adaptive adversarial
attacks.
6.1
Dataset
In the experimental evaluation, we consider three
malware families: Mokes, DCRat, and Strab. These
families were selected because MAB-malware with
the target classifier EMBER achieved high success
rates on them (Jureˇckov´a and Jureˇcek, 2026). Specifi-
cally, for Mokes we generated 2058 adversarial bina-
ries out of 2216, for DCRat 1010 out of 1026, and for
Strab 1595 out of 2191.
The feature set employed in our experiments is
based on the EMBER 2018 dataset, as described in
(Anderson and Roth, 2018). Malware binaries for the
Mokes, Strab, and DCRat families are sourced from
the RawMal-TF dataset (B´alik et al., 2025). In this
dataset, each malware family is accompanied by its
corresponding feature vectors and a balanced set of
feature vectors representing benign files, which were
derived from the original EMBER dataset.
For our experimental evaluation, we do not use the
full dataset. Instead, all reported results are obtained
on a balanced subset of 500 samples per malware fam-
ily, composed in a 50:50 ratio of malware and benign
feature vectors (i.e., 250 malicious and 250 benign
samples). This subset-based evaluation enables a con-
sistent comparison across the three defensive strate-
gies while keeping the iterative bilevel optimization
experiments computationally tractable.
6.2
Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate classification performance using Accu-
racy (Acc), Precision (Prec), and Recall (Rec), de-
fined as:
Acc =
TP+TN
TP+TN +FP+FN ,
Prec =
TP
TP+FP,
Rec =
TP
TP+FN ,
(6)
where TP, TN, FP, FN denote true/false positives
and negatives.
Adversarial robustness is measured by:
• Evasion Rate (ER): The percentage of mal-
ware samples that successfully bypass detection:
ER = (Mevasive/Mtotal) × 100%, where Mevasive is
the count of successful adversarial samples, and
Mtotal is a total number of files submitted to that
classifier.
• Average Queries (Avg Q): The mean number of
queries required by the MAB-malware agent to
find a successful perturbation. This serves as a
proxy for attack complexity.
All metrics are reported on the disjoint test set Dtest,
considered in two variants: a clean version contain-
ing only the original (non-adversarial) samples, and
a clean + adversarial version in which the clean test
set is extended with MAB-malware-perturbed coun-
terparts of its malicious samples, while the benign
samples remain unchanged. In the remainder of the
paper, we refer to the latter as the adversarial test set
for brevity.
6.3
Evaluation of the Mokes Malware
Family
The experimental results, summarized in Table 1,
demonstrate a significant evolution in model robust-
ness across the three tested approaches. In the base-
line scenario (Experiment 1), the classifier achieved
perfect scores but proved to be highly vulnerable to
adversarial manipulation, with an evasion rate (ER)
of 95.83%. The attacker required only 15.93 queries
on average to bypass the detector.
The inclusion of adversarial training in Experi-
ment 2 substantially improved the defense, dropping
the ER to 6.25%.
However, as shown in Table 1,
the bilevel optimization (Experiment 3) provided the

Table 1: Comprehensive Performance for Mokes (Clean vs. Adversarial Test Sets)
Clean Test Set
Adversarial Test Set
Experiment
Acc
Prec
Rec
Acc
Prec
Rec
ER (%)
Avg
Q
(1) Baseline
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.68
1.00
0.51
95.83
15.93
(2) Adv. Train
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.97
1.00
0.94
6.25
932.33
(3) Bilevel
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
–
most complete defense. When evaluated against the
adversarial test set, which includes actively manipu-
lated samples, the bilevel model maintained perfect
precision, recall, and a 0% evasion rate, effectively
neutralizing the attack.
6.4
Evaluation of the Strab Malware
Family
The Strab family reveals distinct characteristics, as
shown in Table 2. The baseline classifier achieved an
accuracy of 0.90 on clean (i.e., non-adversarial) sam-
ples but suffered an ER of 77.36%. In Experiment
2, retraining provided only moderate improvements,
leaving the model vulnerable with a 45.28% ER.
The bilevel optimization fundamentally hardened
the model. While clean test accuracy reached 0.98,
the model’s performance under actual attack (Table
2) remained exceptionally high, with an accuracy of
0.97 and an ER reduced to a marginal 1.89%. This
confirms that for ”difficult” families like Strab, the
iterative interaction in Experiment 3 is essential to
close vulnerabilities that standard retraining fails to
address.
6.5
Evaluation of the DCRat Malware
Family
The results for DCRat (Table 3) highlight the se-
vere limitations of static adversarial training. While
clean test set accuracy was 0.99 in Experiment 2, the
model remained almost entirely bypassed by adver-
sarial samples, with the ER even slightly increasing
to 90.00%.
In stark contrast, Table 3 shows that bilevel opti-
mization successfully neutralized the threat. By gen-
erating a diverse set of 465 adversarial samples across
iterations, the process achieved a model with a 0%
evasion rate and perfect detection scores under attack.
This demonstrates that for families like DCRat, the it-
erative nature of bilevel optimization is not just bene-
ficial, but necessary.
6.6
Iterative Evolution of Bilevel
Optimization
The bilevel optimization process is characterized by
the iterative expansion of the training set. Table 4 de-
tails how the defender adapts to the attacker’s strate-
gies in each cycle, showing the growth of the aug-
mented dataset Dtrain
aug . The columns in Table 4 are
defined as follows:
• Family: The malware family under evaluation.
• Iter.: The current iteration of the bilevel optimiza-
tion cycle.
• New Adv.: Number of new successful adversarial
samples generated by the attacker in the current
iteration.
• Cumul.
Adv.:
Total number of adversarial
samples included in the augmented training set
(Dtrain
aug ).
The iterative progression of Experiment 3 reveals
distinct adaptation patterns across the evaluated mal-
ware families. For Mokes, the bilevel optimization
process demonstrated rapid convergence: the num-
ber of newly generated adversarial samples per iter-
ation shrank quickly (e.g., from 130 to 5 and finally
0 for Mokes), indicating that the defender’s decision
boundary had stabilized and the MAB-malware at-
tacker could no longer find substantially new evasion
paths.
The DCRat family displayed a unique ”threshold”
convergence pattern. The attacker was able to gen-
erate a consistent, full batch of 155 new adversarial
samples for three consecutive iterations, suggesting
a high degree of initial vulnerability. However, this
was followed by a sudden collapse in the attacker’s
success as the defender’s model integrated these di-
verse samples, ultimately reaching convergence. This
highlights that for certain families, a large and diverse
cumulative pool of adversarial samples (465 in this
case) is required before the model can establish a ro-
bust defense.
In contrast, the Strab family exhibited a more
complex co-evolutionary dynamic. The attacker con-
tinued to discover sizeable batches of new adversarial
samples for several iterations (128, 118, 25, 99, 1),

Table 2: Comprehensive Performance for Strab (Clean vs. Adversarial Test Sets)
Clean Test Set
Adversarial Test Set
Experiment
Acc
Prec
Rec
Acc
Prec
Rec
ER (%)
Avg
Q
(1) Baseline
0.90
0.92
0.89
0.64
0.92
0.50
77.36
31.17
(2) Adv. Train
0.92
0.96
0.89
0.74
0.96
0.61
45.28
79.71
(3) Bilevel
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.96
1.89
3118.0
Table 3: Comprehensive Performance for DCRat (Clean vs. Adversarial Test Sets)
Clean Test Set
Adversarial Test Set
Experiment
Acc
Prec
Rec
Acc
Prec
Rec
ER (%)
Avg
Q
(1) Baseline
0.98
1.00
0.96
0.66
1.00
0.49
96.00
16.44
(2) Adv. Train
0.99
1.00
0.98
0.68
1.00
0.52
90.00
60.13
(3) Bilevel
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
–
Table 4: Iteration Results by Family. The optimization ter-
minates when no new adversarial samples are generated.
Family
Iter.
New
Adv.
Cumul.
Adv.
Mokes
1
130
130
2
139
269
3
5
274
4
4
278
DCRat
1
155
155
2
155
310
3
155
465
Strab
1
128
128
2
118
246
3
25
271
4
99
370
5
1
371
reflecting a more diverse adversarial space and slower
convergence. To neutralize these threats, the frame-
work required a significantly larger cumulative vol-
ume of adversarial samples (371 for Strab compared
to 278 for Mokes), illustrating that more resilient mal-
ware families necessitate a deeper iterative search to
exhaust the attacker’s possible transformations.
6.7
Discussion of Comparative Results
The experimental evaluation across three distinct mal-
ware families - Mokes, Strab, and DCRat - reveals
consistent patterns in the effectiveness of the pro-
posed bilevel optimization framework.
Inadequacy of Standard Defense: In all cases,
the baseline classifiers (Exp. 1) exhibited high accu-
racy on clean data but were nearly defenseless against
MAB-malware.
Evaluation on the adversarial test
set revealed a critical drop in Recall (e.g., from 1.00
to 0.51 for Mokes), reflecting evasion rates between
77.36% and 96.00%. This confirms that standard fea-
tures are not inherently robust against targeted pertur-
bations.
Failure of One-Shot Adversarial Training: A
critical finding is observed in the DCRat and Strab
families regarding standard retraining (Exp. 2). For
DCRat, retraining was ineffective, with the ER re-
maining at 90.00% and the adversarial Recall stay-
ing at a low 0.49. This suggests that a single round
of augmentation only covers a narrow subset of the
attack surface, allowing the attacker to easily find al-
ternative evasion paths.
Superiority of Bilevel Optimization: The bilevel
approach (Exp.
3) consistently achieved near-total
immunity. The iterative nature of the process proved
essential:
• Resilience Under Attack: Unlike previous ex-
periments, the bilevel-optimized models main-
tained high performance even on the adversarial
test set. Recall and Accuracy remained near or
at 1.00, demonstrating that the defender success-
fully learned to identify even actively manipulated
samples.
• Convergence:
The defense converged rapidly
(within 3-5 iterations), indicating that the de-
fender can effectively ”exhaust” the attacker’s pri-
mary evasion strategies.
• Complexity Cost: For samples that managed to
evade the model (Strab family), the average query
count increased by two orders of magnitude (from
31 to 3118), significantly raising the attacker’s op-
erational cost.
• Generalization: Hardening the models did not
degrade performance on clean data; for Strab and
DCRat, clean test accuracy even improved to 0.98
and 1.00, respectively.

In conclusion, the strategic interaction in Experi-
ment 3 provides a robust defense boundary that tradi-
tional methods cannot achieve. While DCRat proved
resilient to standard retraining, our iterative approach
successfully neutralized the threat, restoring full de-
tection capabilities under adversarial conditions.
6.8
Convergence and Practical
Equilibrium
Our results confirm the attainment of ε-Nash Equi-
librium across all tested families. For Mokes and
DCRat, the system reached a point of zero ex-
ploitability by the fourth and third iteration, respec-
tively, where the attacker’s evasion rate dropped to
0% and remained constant despite further training.
In the case of the Strab family, a stable state was
reached with a marginal evasion rate of 1.89%. This
stabilization represents the maximum achievable ro-
bustness for the EMBER 2018 feature set used on our
dataset and Random Forest architecture. The conver-
gence to these low or zero success rates demonstrates
that the bilevel optimization process effectively ”ex-
hausts” the attacker’s search space, leading to a ro-
bust defense boundary that is highly resilient to fur-
ther adaptation.
7
CONCLUSIONS
This study compared three defensive strategies
against MAB-malware attacks across the Mokes,
Strab, and DCRat families. Our results demonstrate
that standard classifiers and one-shot adversarial re-
training often fail to secure models against adaptive
threats, with evasion rates remaining as high as 90%
for certain families. In contrast, the proposed bilevel
optimization framework, which models the defense as
an adversarial co-evolutionary process, consistently
achieved near-total immunity with evasion rates be-
tween 0–1.89%. Furthermore, our approach signifi-
cantly increased the attack complexity, forcing a two-
order-of-magnitude rise in the required number of
queries.
Future work will expand this framework to in-
clude diverse machine learning architectures, such as
Deep Neural Networks and Gradient Boosted Trees.
We also plan to evaluate the scalability of bilevel op-
timization across a larger variety of malware families
and investigate the impact of different attacker reward
functions on the resulting defense boundaries.