IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. XX, 2026
1
PASTA: A Patch-Agnostic Twofold-Stealthy Backdoor Attack on
Vision Transformers
Dazhuang Liu, Yanqi Qiao, Rui Wang, Kaitai Liang, and Georgios Smaragdakis
Abstract—Vision Transformers (ViTs) have achieved remark-
able success across various vision tasks, yet recent studies reveal
that ViTs are vulnerable to backdoor attacks. Existing patch-wise
attacks against ViTs focus on a single trigger activation location
during inference to maximize trigger attention. However, these
attacks fail to fully exploit the characteristic of self-attention
mechanism that captures long-range dependencies across patches.
We stand for the first work to observe that a patch-wise
trigger delivers high attack effectiveness when activating the
backdoor across neighboring patches, a unique phenomenon in
ViTs we term Trigger Radiating Effect (TRE). Additionally, we
find that inserting patch-wise triggers in an inter-patch manner
synergistically enhances TRE compared to single-patch insertion
during backdoor training. Moreover, existing ViT-specific attacks
that maximize model attention on triggers compromise both
visual and attention stealthiness, making them vulnerable to
human and machine inspection.
Building upon the above insights, we propose a twofold stealthy
patch-wise backdoor attack in the pixel and attention domains,
dubbed PASTA, with a new attack payload, where an attacker
can activate the backdoor with the trigger in an arbitrary patch
during inference. To achieve the payload, we first propose a
multi-location trigger insertion strategy to enhance TRE syn-
ergistically. However, achieving our payload while maintaining
twofold stealthiness remains a significant challenge, as we observe
that the TRE is significantly undermined against stealthy trigger
designs. Therefore, we formulate our backdoor attack as a bi-level
optimization problem and propose an adaptive backdoor learning
framework to solve it. Specifically, our learning framework allows
both backdoor model parameters and the trigger to gradually
adapt to each other’s updates, mitigating convergence to local
optima caused by their non-separability in loss terms. Extensive
experiments comprehensively showcase that PASTA achieves at-
tack effectiveness of 99.13% across arbitrary patches on average,
superior visual stealthiness (144.43× improvement) and attention
stealthiness (18.68× improvement), and better attack robustness
(2.79× enhancement) under our payload against state-of-the-art
ViT-specific defenses compared to both CNN- and ViT-specific
attacks across four public datasets.
Index Terms—Backdoor attack, stealthy attack, vision trans-
former, bi-level optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) achieved huge success in
Computer Vision (CV) tasks, such as image classification [1],
[2], object tracking [3], [4], object detection [5], [6], and
facial recognition [7]. Empowered by the self-attention mech-
anism, Vision Transformers (ViTs) [8] have challenged the
long-standing dominance of Convolutional Neural Networks
Dazhuang Liu, Yanqi Qiao, Rui Wang and Georgios Smaragdakis are with
Delft University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands.
Kaitai Liang is with the University of Turku, Turku, Finland and Delft
University of Technology, Delft, the Netherlands.
(CNNs) [9] in many CV fields. Specifically, ViTs process
input images by dividing them into a sequence of patches.
Then, the self-attention mechanism weights the relevance of
each patch to others, enabling ViTs to capture long-range
dependencies in those patches effectively. However, similar
to CNNs, ViTs has been proven to be vulnerable to backdoor
attacks [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. The general goal
of a backdoor attack is to implant hidden malicious behaviors
into DNNs by inserting a trigger into clean samples. This goal
causes the victim model to produce incorrect, attacker-desired,
predictions on poisoned data during inference, while behaving
normally on clean data. Since training ViTs with large-scale
parameters demands high computational resources, users often
outsource the training process or fine-tune pre-trained models
downloaded from the Internet for downstream tasks. However,
this practice creates more opportunities for attackers to inject
backdoors into the models of benign users.
Recently, backdoor attacks have developed with diverse
trigger designs, including patch-based triggers [10], [17],
blended triggers [11], more advanced sample-specific trig-
gers [18], [19], [20], [21] and frequency triggers [22], [23],
[24], [25]. Yuan et al. [13] show that patch-wise triggers are
more effective than blended triggers against ViTs, prompting
ViT-specific attacks [13], [14], [15] to develop optimized
patch-wise triggers that maximize model attention on them.
However, these attacks rely on the pre-defined trigger insertion
location used in backdoor training to activate the backdoor
during inference. Moreover, neither CNN- nor ViT-specific
attacks investigate how convolutional filters and self-attention
mechanisms impact attack effectiveness across different trig-
ger activation locations (TALs) during inference. This research
gap prompts an intriguing question:
Q1: Is the attack effectiveness of patch-based triggers sensitive
to different TALs during inference in CNNs and ViTs based on
their inherent architectural differences?
We systematically investigate how attack effectiveness of
patch-based triggers is impacted by TALs during backdoor
inference in ViTs and CNNs. Our empirical study (see Fig-
ure 1(a)-(d)) shows that attack effectiveness is sensitive to
TALs in CNNs. In contrast, in ViTs, a patch-wise trigger1
inserted in a pre-defined patch location during backdoor
training remains effective even when inserted in neighboring
patches during inference (see Figure 1(e)-(h)) – a phenomenon
we term the Trigger Radiating Effect (TRE) on attack ef-
1Patch-wise triggers are a specific type of patch-based trigger in which the
trigger size matches the patch size used in ViTs. We limit the scope of our
research on patch-wise triggers in ViTs.
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2026 IEEE
arXiv:2604.20047v1 [cs.CV] 21 Apr 2026

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. XX, 2026
2
fectiveness. TRE can be simply quantified as the average
attack effectiveness across all patches activated by a patch-
wise trigger. Furthermore, we reveal that a larger patch-wise
trigger perturbation in ViTs introduces a stronger TRE, while a
smaller perturbation yields an opposite effect (Figure 1(i)-(l)).
The above findings raise a further question:
Q2: Given that a stealthy patch-wise trigger exhibits a limited
TRE on attack effectiveness in ViTs, can backdoor training
with the trigger in multiple trigger insertion locations syner-
gistically enhance the TRE?
To further evaluate the synergistic impact of patch-wise
triggers on TRE, we fine-tune a ViT model by inserting a
patch-wise trigger pattern into one of the two pre-selected
patch locations (i.e., an inter-patch manner) per poisoned
sample. Our TRE results demonstrate that training a backdoor
with a patch-wise trigger pattern inserted across multiple
patch locations synergistically improves TRE compared to the
single-patch insertion approach (Figure 1(m)-(p)).
Besides, current ViT-specific attacks [13], [14], [15] fail to
achieve twofold stealthiness, including visual and attention im-
perceptibility in pixel and attention spaces, respectively. Given
that a large perturbation has a stronger TRE but undermines
twofold stealthiness, a natural question then arises:
Q3: How can a backdoor attack leverages a patch-wise
trigger achieve twofold stealthiness while enabling high attack
effectiveness across arbitrary patches (i.e., strong TRE) during
inference?
To answer the question, we introduce PASTA, a patch-
wise backdoor attack against ViTs that achieves a new attack
payload where a backdoor can be activated across arbitrary
patches with high attack effectiveness, while maintaining ex-
cellent visual and attention stealthiness (see Figure 2 for the
workflow). First, we propose a Multi-location trigger Insertion
Strategy (MIS) by inserting our trigger into a random location
from a candidate set for each poisoned sample, in order
to achieve strong TRE. Then, we consider twofold stealthy
trigger design by minimizing the disparity of attention map
between clean and poisoned samples, and constraining the
visual imperceptibility by the l2-norm of trigger perturbations.
While it is challenging to achieve strong TRE and twofold
stealthiness simultaneously, we formulate trigger and model
optimization as a bi-level optimization problem to achieve all
attack objectives. Since changes in model parameters and the
trigger during optimization directly affect the loss value with
respect to the other, we propose an adaptive backdoor train-
ing framework to effectively solve the problem. Specifically,
we update the trigger and model parameters alternately for
small iterations, allowing both variables to gradually adapt to
each other’s minimal updates. By doing so, we reduce the
correlational influence of two variables on loss values in non-
separable loss terms, preventing them from converging to local
optima. Thanks to the newly proposed attack payload, the
backdoor can be effectively activated during inference by our
optimal patch-wise trigger across arbitrary patches, enabling
the evasion of state-of-the-art backdoor defenses.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We observe, for the first time, that patch-wise triggers
have a stronger trigger radiating effect (TRE) on the attack
effectiveness of neighboring patches in ViTs than in CNNs,
due to the self-attention mechanism. Also, inserting a patch-
wise trigger in an inter-patch manner during backdoor training
synergistically enhances TRE. Based on these insights, we
propose a multi-location trigger insertion strategy to deliver
strong TRE.
• We propose a new backdoor payload that evades backdoor
defenses, enabling an attacker to activate the backdoor across
arbitrary patches during inference. In addition, we consider
visual and attention stealthiness to bypass human and machine
inspection. We introduce PASTA, a visual and attention-
stealthy patch-wise backdoor attack against ViTs under our
payload. We formulate all attack objectives as a bi-level
optimization problem and introduce an adaptive optimization
framework to solve it effectively.
• Our extensive experiments demonstrate that PASTA achieves
superior attack effectiveness on all patches (99.13%), better
visual stealthiness (144.43× improvement) and attention im-
perceptibility (18.68×) under l2-norm and qualitative visu-
alizations, 2.79× enhancement on attack robustness against
3 ViT-specific defenses, compared to 3 general and 3 ViT-
specific backdoor attacks across 4 real-world datasets. We will
make the source code publicly available upon the publication
of this paper.
We discuss the ethical considerations of this paper in