Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions
while Triaging Alarms? A Real-World Study
Jessica Moosmann1, Irdin Pekaric1, and Giovanni Apruzzese21
1 University of Liechtenstein, Vaduz, Liechtenstein
2 Reykjavik University, Reykjavik, Iceland
Abstract. Security Operations Centers (SOCs) are pivotal in modern
enterprises. Tasked to monitor complex network environments constantly
under attack, SOCs can be active 24/7 and can include hundreds of oper-
ators supported by state-of-the-art technologies. Abundant research has
studied the internal processes of SOCs, highlighting their pros and cons,
as well as the challenges faced by SOC analysts—such as dealing with
the overwhelming number of false alarms triggered by automated secu-
rity mechanisms. In this context, we wonder: given that “someone” must
triage the alarms, and that such triaging must be grounded on established
knowledge or evidence-based reasoning, can SOC employees justify why
a certain decision was taken while triaging alarms? Answering such a
research question (RQ) can better guide future efforts.
We hence tackle this RQs. First, via a systematic literature review across
257 research documents, we provide evidence that such RQ received lim-
ited attention so far. Then, we partner-up with a real-world SOC and
carry out a field study (n=12) with SOC employees. We show them real
alarms raised in their SOC, and inquire whether such alarms are in-
dicative of true security problems or not. Then, we ask to explain their
decision. We found that while most analysts were able to separate “true
from false” alarms (the decision was correct in 83% of the cases), a correct
justification was hardly provided (only 39% of the provided explanations
reflected the actual root cause). Ultimately, our results highlight the need
for decision-support systems that help SOC analysts not only make the
right call—but also understand and articulate why it is right.
1
Introduction
Organizations worldwide are constantly targeted by cyberattacks [62,10,17]. To
address this problem at scale, Security Operation Centers (SOC) are a funda-
mental asset to businesses of any size [14,47]. Mostly operating 24/7 and typ-
ically having 2–10 staff members [47], SOC protect the network perimeter of
various companies by preventing incoming threats, detecting intrusions, as well
as implementing and enacting recovery plans [47]. To this purpose, SOC leverage
state-of-the-art tools, such as system information and event management (SIEM)
platforms, which are kept up-to-date with the most recent security feeds [47].
The criticality of SOC in the current information-technology (IT) landscape
is established [47]. As such, lots of scientific research focused on SOC, proposing
arXiv:2604.22001v1 [cs.CR] 23 Apr 2026

2
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
2005
2007
2010
2012
2015
2017
2020
2022
2025
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Entries Returned by Google Scholar (yearly)
Search Query
"security operations center" AND "explanation" AND "false positives" AND ("user study" OR "questionnaire" OR "interview") [hits=257]
"security operations center" AND "false positives" [hits=2227]
"security operations center" AND ("user study" OR "questionnaire" OR "interview") [hits=2296]
"security operations center" AND "explanation" [hits=4160]
"security operations center" [hits=11506]
Fig. 1: Research interest in Security Operations Centers (SOC). Results returned by issuing
specific queries in Google Scholar. For “security operation centers”, we considered variants (e.g., the
complete term was “(‘security operation center’ OR ‘security operations center’ OR ‘security opera-
tion centre’ OR ‘security operations centre’); for “false positives” we considered: “(‘false alarm’ OR
‘false positive’ OR ‘false alert’)”; for “user study”, we considered “(‘user survey’ OR ‘user study’)”;
for “explanation”, we consider “(‘explainability’ OR ‘explainable’ OR ‘explain’ OR ‘explanation’)”.
methods to improve their workflows [60], enhancing deployed systems [59,50],
analysing pain points [5], or exposing their weaknesses [44]. To portray the his-
torical “research interest” towards SOCs, we show in Fig. 1 the number of results
returned (yearly) by Google Scholar by issuing various SOC-related queries in
the last 20 years. Accordingly, over 11k scientific documents have tackled the
domain of SOCs. Recurrent themes involve, e.g., the problem of false positives,
triggered by the overwhelming amounts of data processed by various devices
which must be analysed and upon which high-stakes decisions must be taken [36].
Such processes lead to the well-known alert fatigue and decrease the efficiency
of SOC employees [55]. Nevertheless, SOC analysts are also expected to explain
why a certain decision was taken—especially when they need to justify, to their
customers, why an incorrect decision was made [6].
In this context, and also given that SOC-related infrastructures are recog-
nized also by legal bodies, industry standards, and institutional boards [3,2,26],
we took a step back, and one research question (RQ1) surfaced. Can SOC an-
alysts explain their decisions while triaging alarms? Indeed, modern environ-
ments generate alarms, not all of them being indicative of security-noteworthy
events [35]; for instance, Yang et al. [63] claim that most alarms are due to so-
called benign triggers, deriving from apparently malicious behaviors but stem-
ming from benign causes (e.g., a scheduled vulnerability scan launched by a
security appliance). We hypothesize that some of these alarms can be trivial to
resolve, especially if appropriate context is given. But what if the alarms are
more challenging to triage? In these cases, and given that a decision must be
made (e.g., either to invest resources in troubleshooting the problem—potentially
leading to time waste; or ignore the problem—and potentially causing a security
breach), can the operators provide a plausible explanation for their choices?
We argue that RQ1 has plenty of practical implications. For instance, if the
answer is a clear “yes”, then it means that existing infrastructures (encompassing
both IT systems as well as documentation and management) provide good sup-
port to SOC analysts. Conversely, if the answer is “not so much”, then it would

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
3
indicate that there is a need for better decision-support systems [30]. Regard-
less, tackling RQ1 also simultaneously enables one to address another research
question (RQ2): Are certain alarms harder to triage than others? Indeed, investi-
gating RQ1 requires to show various alarms to SOC operators and record (i) the
decision and (ii) the explanation. Although the 2019 study by Kokulu et al. [31]
argues that false positives do not have a significant impact on the operation of
the considered SOC, we believe that exploring RQ1 and RQ2 is instrumental to
guide future research: if certain “false alerts” are systematically easier to triage,
then specific rules can be defined so as to avoid burdening analysts—whereas
ad-hoc tools would be needed to handle more complex cases.
Contributions. In this work, we conduct a case study in a real-world SOC to
investigate RQ1 and RQ2. Let us summarize our major contributions:
• As a first step, we examine if RQ1 had been previously explored. Through a
systematic literature review across 257 related documents, we found only one
peer-reviewed work [29] that can be said to be truly related to RQ1. However,
the research in [29] did not specifically focus on RQ1, since the respective user
study (n=4) was meant to validate the output of a research prototype.
• Then, to shed more light, we find an agreement with a SOC in Europe and
carry out a field exercise with 12 full-time analysts (§3). Our study encom-
passes over 30k events distributed across six cases of different triaging diffi-
culty. For each case, participants must provide a decision (true or false alarm)
and justify their choice via open-text answers. The decision was correct in 83%
of the answers, but 61% of the explanations were incorrect or imprecise (§4).
• Qualitative analyses based on a pre- and post-study questionnaire revealed
that expertise or self-confidence do not reflect a participant’s explanation
accuracy. Moreover, some cases were perceived as systematically harder to
triage, with participants commenting that there was “missing information”
(even though they were provided with all the necessary tooling).
We do not seek to generalize our results to all SOCs, but our findings can be
instrumental for future work (§5). We provide additional details in our repo [1].
2
Background and Motivation
We outline fundamental concepts of SOCs (§2.1), and then discuss our literature
review (§2.2), which underpins the research gap tackled by our work (§2.3).
2.1
Security Operations Centers (SOC)
Security Operations Centers have been extensively covered in prior research
(refer to Fig. 1). Recent summaries and reviews, such as [55,46,30], provide
a comprehensive overview of the current state of SOCs. In what follows, we
pinpoint the elements that are most necessary to appreciate our contributions.
A SOC is a central unit within a company whose main task is to (con-
tinuously) monitor their Information and Communication Technology environ-
ment [67]. It is common [67,5] to distinguish three key components that, if prop-
erly orchestrated, lead to an effective SOC: people, processes, and technologies.

4
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
We provide in Fig. 2 a sketched architecture of a typical SOC (supported also
by the analysts of our considered SOC). SOCs teams typically encompass 2–10
people [47]: while (security) analysts are those responsible for handling security
incidents, other specialized personnel (e.g., engineers) are also crucial to ensure
a smooth workflow [31,52]. Processes serve to establish the necessary boundaries
that define how people interact with technologies. For instance, instructions as
to how to deal with alarms, what activities are or not allowed by certain hosts,
or who to contact in case of a breach—all such information can be found in
process-related documents (typically known as playbooks [52]). Technologies en-
compass all the technical infrastructure that embeds the core functionality of
the SOC. The most popular tools include SIEMs [63], which typically are de-
veloped by well-known security vendors (e.g., Splunk [51]); however, a SOC can
also rely on ad-hoc and custom software. Such software is designed to receive
data inputs from a variety of Log Sources. Traditionally, such log sources encom-
pass IT devices, such as firewalls or routers; however, in select SOCs, these log
sources can also include “Operational Technology” (OT) devices, such as PLC
or components typically deployed in industrial control systems [15,33].
Numerous long-standing problems affect SOC environments. For instance,
false alarms—for which it is even hard to even provide an universally-recognised
definition (e.g., the “benign triggers” envisioned by [63] are not considered false
positives according to [5]; and regardless, Kokulu et al. [31] argue that, after
all, false positives do not have a significant impact on SOCs). Another closely
related issue is that of explainability [36,6]. SOC environments are becoming
increasingly more complex, and analysts must make more decisions which, in
turn, should account for more data. As such, analysts are on the lookout for
tools that “explain” the root cause of a certain event (or, alternatively, “why
an alarm was raised”). Such additional input can hence be used to make an
informed decision in the presence of overwhelming amounts of datapoints [5,38].
Otherwise, as previous studies indicated [11,40,43], analysts may rely on intuition
or gut feelings, which can cloud their judgment and lead to irrational decisions.
SOC Analysts
Specialists
Use Cases
Playbooks
Policies
SIEM-Ruleset
SIEM
Analyst Platform
IT
OT
PEOPLE
PROCESSES
TECHNOLOGIES
LOG SOURCES
Fig. 2: Typical SOC architecture (IT-Information Technology, OT-Operational Technology).
2.2
Systematic Literature Review
We began our study with a broad research question (RQ0): has prior work carried
out user studies in which SOC practitioners were asked to triage alarms and
explain their decisions? To answer RQ0, we carry out a systematic literature

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
5
Google Scholar
queries
Which documents are
peer reviewed works?
257
documents
74 (unique)
peer-reviewed
papers
Which papers carry
out User Studies?
54 (+1)
user studies
- What type of user study   (e.g.,
survey, or interview)?
- Who participated in the study
(e.g., SOC analysts?)
Fig. 3: Overview of the methodology of our SLR. The qualitative analysis was done by two authors.
review (SLR), following established PRISMA guidelines [37]. A depiction of our
methodology is in Fig. 3 (more details are reported in the Appendix A.1). 3
Paper Collection. We collected works via Google Scholar. We devised a
search query revolving around four keyword groups: “SOC”, “explainability”,
“user study”, and “false positives”. Intuitively, a paper that addressed RQ0
(implicitly or explicitly) should mention these terms at least once (refer to the
caption of Fig. 1 for the exact queries). We filter the results between 2005–2025
(the earliest document appeared in 2007 [23]). Overall, we obtain 257 papers.
Screening. Next, we remove results not relevant for RQ0. We remove all
non-peer-reviewed works (e.g., preprints [49] or theses/books [23,13]). This way,
we obtained 74 papers. Then, we manually checked the content of these papers,
seeking to identify papers that carried out user studies. 19 papers only mentioned
terms related to user studies as generic recommendations (e.g., [56]) or to refer
to prior work (e.g., [55]). However, while inspecting such works, we found one
paper that is very relevant for RQ0, i.e., [18] which we added to our SLR.4
Analysis. We manually analysed our set of 55 papers carrying out user stud-
ies. We sought to answer two questions: (i) “what type of user study is carried
out?” (ii) “are the participants SOC practitioners?”. For the first question, we
found that 34 papers carried out interviews, whereas 9 used asynchronous sur-
veys/questionnaire; four papers carried out a mixed-method study [46,52,29,58],
and seven carried out a field-study exercise [65,66,53,44,27,34,7]. For the second
question, only 14 papers made it explicit that the participants were exclusively
SOC professionals: other works consider generic employees [9], or pooled SOC
analysts with non-SOC members (e.g., [39]), or a broad “security specialists/pro-
fessionals/researchers” (e.g., [24,36]). Nonetheless, some papers clearly did not
cover SOC environments (e.g., [45]): among our 55 papers, we could only map
39 to SOC-specific contexts (e.g., triaging alarms while accounting for real-world
constraints). For transparency, we report the full results of our SLR in [1].
2.3
Related Work and Research Gap
To fully answer RQ0, we assessed the papers found through our SLR once more,
asking ourselves: “is the paper about explaining the decisions made by analysts?”
3 We carried out a preliminary investigation in Dec. 2024; we repeated this process in
Dec. 2025 to ensure that, at submission time, our answer is still valid; and further
validated our findings by double-checking [21] our results a third time in Feb. 2026.
4 This work was not captured by our query because [18] it mentions “explainable
alerts” and not “false alerts”; all works relevant to RQ0 should mention “false alert-
s/alarms/positives”, but to avoid missing these cases we inspected also the references.
Specifically, we found [18] while reviewing the recent survey by Tariq et al. [55].

6
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
In what follows, we briefly discuss our results, highlighting the works that are
closest to our purpose—and which also support our overall research.
The authors of [34] carry out a proof-of-concept evaluation of a framework
meant to study the explainability of AI-driven methods: this is done via a sur-
vey across 7 participants who should serve as a proxy of “potential cybersecurity
analysts”. However, aside from the unclear background of participants, the as-
sessment is based on research prototypes, and does not reflect an operational
SOC environment. The seminal work by [5], followed by other recent works from
top-tier venues [46,36], contributed with the results of 15–21 interviews with SOC
(or security-focused) professionals. However, while these works serve to highlight
common operational pain-points, the findings are based on the perceptions of the
interviewees—in other words, there is no actual assessment of the practitioners’
ability to explain their decisions (or triage false alarms). The research in [18] in-
volves a user study, done with 10 SOC analysts, focused on assessing the quality
of eXplainable AI techniques in a SOC context. Despite being conceptually sim-
ilar to our goal (i.e., assessing explanations), there is a fundamental difference
because the study in [18] focuses on assessing software-generated explanations,
whereas we focus on human-generated explanations.
Three very close works are [32], and [65,66]. The former [32] inquires 15
analysts within the same SOC about the perception of the output of the solution
proposed in the corresponding paper, asking questions such as “do you think
you understood what this IOC means?” which could be answered with a 5-
point Likert scale: such an instrument, again, mostly reflects the perception of
the participant. The authors of [65,66] conduct a full-fledged simulation (across
“30 professional analysts from Army Research Lab”) sought to measure the
participants ability to triage alarms. However, the data used for this experiment
was not that of the SOC wherein the participants worked, but was generated
through a simulation which occurred years before the study took place; moreover,
there is no assessment of the participants’ ability to explain their decisions.
The work most aligned with RQ0 is the paper by Kersten et al. [29]. They
carry out a study with four SOC practitioners asking which alerts are “interest-
ing” (which can be a way to gauge if the practitioner considers it as a true/false
alert) and to adopt a (recorded) think-aloud approach (which slows-down the
analysis [42]). Then, participants motivated their choice via pre-defined answers.
This is the only work we found that can be used to answer positively to RQ0.
Answer to RQ0. According to our SLR,a only one work [29] could be said to
have investigated whether real SOC practitioners can correctly explain the de-
cisions they make. However, this study [29] was conducted to assess a proposed
tool, considered only 4 SOC analysts, and the justifications had to be provided
via think-aloud mechanism (which increases the cognitive load and influence
the analysis [42]) and pre-defined answers (which may lead to bias [16]).
a We also applied the snowball method [61], checking for papers cited, or cited by,
the aforementioned works. Despite finding other relevant papers (e.g., [22,57]), we
were unable to find other works that could support a positive answer to RQ0.

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
7
Our work builds upon that of [29]. Specifically, we will examine if employees of
a single SOC, when faced with high-stakes decisions such as whether to consider
an alarm as a false or true positive, can (i) make the correct choice, and (ii) jus-
tify their choice via open-text answers [12]. Importantly, we acknowledge that
focusing on a single SOC prevents deriving generalizable conclusions—which is
why we do not make such a claim. However, we believe that our contributions are
useful to (a) inspire future work to carry out similar studies; and (b) provide evi-
dence of how well some SOC practitioners can handle their routine tasks—which
entail interacting with state-of-the-art production systems.
3
Methodology
We describe the approach used to investigate how well SOC analysts triage
alarms and justify of their decisions. We utilize a controlled field experiment,
carried out in a real SOC, entailing structured questionnaires and qualitative
analysis. We aim to obtain factual evidence of SOC analysts’ decisions in condi-
tions mirroring operational environments, thereby enabling to answer our RQs.
An important remark is that our study was devised in close collaboration with
the examined SOC. This ensured that the setup aligned with the operational
environment, thereby increasing the ecological validity of our study (We will
discuss the implications of this peculiar characteristic of our study in §5.1)
3.1
Study Design Overview
Our methodology follows a mixed-methods design consisting of two components:
the definition of a realistic SOC case environment (which we discuss in §3.2); and
a practical alarm-classification exercise, enriched with a pre- and post-exercise
questionnaires (explained in detail in §3.3). Our approach hence resembles the
one in [29,32], with the difference that our study does not revolve around vali-
dating a new “tool/solution”, rather, our study is grounded in the operational
workflow of a real-world SOC (from both a data and system perspective).
At a high level, the considered SOC leverages state-of-the-art appliances,
including a SIEM platform that aggregated reports from various log sources.
From this environment, we derive a set of representative alarms (which we denote
as cases) that encode varying degrees of difficulty, contextual complexity, and
ambiguity. Alarm selection was guided by three criteria: diversity of underlying
causes (e.g., benign processes, misconfigurations, scanning activity); variation
in contextual dependencies; and mixed explainability challenges, ranging from
trivial to essentially ambiguous alerts. This design allows us to isolate differences
in analysts’ abilities to detect false alarms and articulate correct reasoning. Yet,
given the space of use cases that can occur in a SOC, we anticipate that any
selection (for the sake of our study) cannot ensure complete coverage.
For time-related reasons (further detailed in §3.3), we ultimately decided to
include six cases in our study, summarized in Table 1. Such a selection was
carried out qualitatively by two researchers: one with access to domain-specific

8
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
Table 1: Summary of the Six Cases of Alerts included in our Study. Brief description:
Case-1: Scheduled vulnerability scan triggered alarms. Case-2: Firewall allows specific developer
traffic. Case-3: DNS sinkhole detects C&C traffic; connection blocked. Case-4: HTTP redirect to
msftconnecttest misclassified as suspicious. Case-5; WiFi client triggered alert due to network in-
stability. Case-6: Endpoint protection quarantined infected file. (More details in our repository [1])
Case
Category
Alerts Logged
Events
Alert Type
Key
Observables
Source
Action
/
Indicator
1:
Network
scan
by
internal
sys-
tem
False
Posi-
tive - trivial
(with
con-
text)
/
relevant
(without)
15
2,034
over 4h
Port
scanning
/
suspicious
net-
work activity
IP source, IP destina-
tion,
hit
count,
fire-
wall action
Internal
IP
(Nessus
server)
Accept;
system
role
identified
in
asset database
2: Developer
activity trig-
gering alerts
False
Posi-
tive - trivial
4
1,340
over 48h
Outbound
con-
nections
from
internal IPs
IP source, IP destina-
tion,
hit
count,
pro-
tocol, firewall action,
category, properties
Internal
developer-
segment
IPs
Accept;
triggered
by
developer-
specific
firewall
rule
3: Outbound
C2
commu-
nication
True
Posi-
tive
1
2
over
10h
Outbound
con-
nection
to
Com-
mand
&
Control
server
IP source, IP destina-
tion,
hit
count,
fire-
wall
action,
malware
action
Internal
host
Prevent; DNS trap
and
malware
ac-
tion confirm C2 ac-
tivity
4:
Windows
connectivity
check
False
Posi-
tive - trivial
2
31,518
in 24h
Outbound
HTTP/S
traffic
to
connectivity-
check URL
IP source, IP destina-
tion, hit count, proto-
col, firewall action
Internal
load
bal-
ancer
Pass;
traffic
to
msftconnecttest
incl.
HTTP redirect
5:
Internal
retrans-
mission
classified
as
malicious
False
Pos-
itive
-
relevant
1
2 in 2h
Internal
retrans-
mission
pattern
flagged
as
mali-
cious
IP source, IP destina-
tion, hit count, proto-
col number, detected
host, domain, action,
reason
Internal
dynam-
ically
assigned
WiFi IP
Block;
triggered
because
IP
source
belongs
to
WiFi
pool
6:
Malicious
PowerShell
script
True
Posi-
tive
1
2 in 20h
Endpoint
protec-
tion
alert:
suspi-
cious
PowerShell
script
Hit
count,
detected
host,
host,
domain,
user, label, reason
Endpoint
(self-
reported)
File
blocked
&
quarantined;
virus
label, affected file,
external-account
username
operational knowledge of the SOC, and one independent researcher, who acted as
a validator for the selection. Collectively, our cases encompass over 30k events
which triggered 24 alarms in total. Recall that, for RQ2, we want to see if
certain alarms are harder to triage: therefore, choosing cases that – according
to our own judgment – are more complex should serve to question such an
hypothesis, which we can test both by measuring the rate of correct answers,
but also via the follow-up questionnaire. This is why some cases in Table 1 are
marked as “trivial”, meaning that a SOC analyst should quickly infer that the
alarm is not indicative of a security-noteworthy event. On the contrary, other
cases are marked as “relevant” because making such a decision requires carrying
out additional analyses to obtain more contextual information.
After defining the cases (further described in our repository [1]) and after re-
cruiting the participants (we report some demographic details in Appendix A.3),
we administered the user study (in April 2025) and analysed the results.
3.2
Technical Environment (SOC Description)
We conducted our study in a SOC operating in the DACH (German-Austrian-
Swiss) area; for confidentiality, we cannot provide extensive details. Companies in
this geographical location are constantly under cyberattacks [20,19,54], meaning
that our considered environment can serve as a proxy for SOCs in other areas.
The SOC’s architecture resembles that described in §2.1. The SOC monitors
a hybrid IT/OT environment that includes heterogeneous network segments,
Windows and Linux endpoints, perimeter firewalls from multiple vendors, in-
dustrial controllers and several business-critical applications. All these systems
continuously generate audit, network, and security telemetry. This data is sent
to a central SIEM platform via standardized interfaces (e.g., syslogs).

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
9
The SIEM constitutes the analysts’ primary work environment. It runs the
production correlation pipeline that consists of data normalization, enrichment,
rule-based matching and temporal correlation. We did not add any experimental
rules. All the alarms that were used in the exercise were triggered using the stan-
dard rule set, which is operated in daily business. This ensures that the applied
cases reflected typical data quality, data volume, enrichment depth, and alert
semantics that is encountered during regular operations (unlike the synthetic
setup in [65,66], using data from elsewhere).
The SOC uses a layered tool stack that consists of (i) the SIEM for raw-
data inspection and correlation logic, (ii) a dedicated case-management platform
where alarms are triaged and documented, and (iii) an internal asset database
that provides contextual information such as device roles, network segments,
ownership and previous activities. During the study, participants received the
same access rights and data views that they use in routine operations. We did
this without introducing any additional filters, hints or experimental artifacts
(which, perhaps unconsciously, could influence participants’ responses [29,32]).
Our technical environment thus ensured that participants’ decisions are shaped
by the same constraints, information structures and tooling conditions of their
routine SOC environment. The six addressed cases (in Table 1) were extracted
from this ecosystem without modifying event semantics, field names, or rule
logic. Moreover, all cases were derived from alerts that had occurred in produc-
tion and had been processed through the standard normalization, enrichment,
and correlation pipeline. Moreover, we considered cases that (i) occurred weeks
before the field study, thereby ensuring that participants would not remember
them; but which (ii) were still affected by the same infrastructure, thereby en-
suring that the corresponding ground truth did not change.
Raw log entries associated with each alert were exported together with the
correlated event groups that the SIEM generated at the time of detection. During
preparation, sensitive fields (e.g., internal hostnames, user identifiers, customer-
related data) were anonynimised according to the company’s data-protection
guidelines. We preserved the structural characteristics required for triaging, in-
cluding timestamps, alert metadata, correlation fields and observable attributes.
Each case was validated against the operational incident documentation and
the asset database to confirm its factual ground truth. This ensured that both
true positives and false positives reflect real underlying causes and not synthetic
constructs. Importantly, sanitization process did not alter the semantic con-
tent of the logs or introduce potential artifacts that could non purposely guide
analysts. The final case sets were prepared in a way that maintained the full
analytical complexity of the original alerts. Additionally, they met all internal
confidentiality and data-protection requirements.
3.3
Study Implementation and Ethics
Participant Recruitment. In April 2025, we recruited 12 full-time security
analysts that work in the same SOC environment. Participants were of various

10
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
experience levels, ranging from junior to senior analysts. Participation was com-
pletely voluntary, and there was no identifiable information collected. The study
was carried out during the participants’ regular working hours. We quantified
the total time that each participant would spend for our study in roughly 3
hours, of which 2 were spent on the day of the exercise, and another hour would
be spent for logistics and communication. To better reflect operational contexts
and to minimize time waste, the study was done synchronously (on site) and
in groups, but participants could not communicate to each other. This ensured
that their decisions could be attributed to personal reasoning. Importantly, the
employer company had been made aware of our study, and the overall design and
implementation complied with the SOC’s internal standards (confirmed by their
management). We report in the Appendix A.2 additional ethical considerations.
Pre-study phase. The study begins with a ≈45 minutes preparatory session
during which participants are explained the objectives and procedure of the
study. This included an explanation of what to expect over the next two hours,
and which systems are available for processing the tasks (e.g., the SIEM). Or-
ganizational framework conditions were also discussed, including the planned
time structure, instructions on behavior during the study and how to deal with
open questions. A compact introduction to the systems was given, in which the
most important functions relevant to case processing were explained. Finally, the
technical setup was reviewed and tested and any final questions were clarified.
After this preparatory phase, the participants were given access to a preliminary
questionnaire (entirely reported in our repository [1]), through which we could
record participants’ previous experience, skills and assessments with regard to
alarm analyses. The average time taken to complete the initial questionnaire was
around 15 minutes. The aggregated results are provided in Appendix A.3.
Practical Classification Exercise. Participants were given a cheat sheet con-
taining the key information to support the analysis. The duration of the exercise
was set to 30 minutes: this served to infer how well each participant would per-
form in a limited timespan (roughly, 5 minutes per case). We report all cases in
detail in Table 1. For each case, participants performed two tasks: classification
(they had to decide whether the case represents a true or false positive) and jus-
tification (they had to provide a free-text explanation that includes the rationale
behind the classification). For the latter, and crucially, participants should have
known how to properly justify each answer (both because of their prior exper-
tise, but also because of the preliminary phase). Each case consisted of sanitized
log data and contextual information extracted from the real SOC environment.
The presentation mirrored the information flow that analysts experience during
daily operations, including correlated events, timestamps, and relevant system
attributes. We ensured that participants could access all information necessary
to resolve a case (though usage of AI was prohibited, since it is also not part
of the SOC workflow), and participants were reminded at regular intervals to
move on to the next case if they were finding a case particularly challenging.
Participants were not informed about the number of true/false positives. With

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
11
the exception of one participant (who required 18 minutes), all participants took
the entire 30 minutes to complete the exercise.
Post-study phase. After the main exercise, participants were shown a survey
asking open questions about the complexity of the cases, decision making, and
time efficiency. The entire questionnaire is reported in our repository [1]. The
focus was on identifying influencing factors that have a positive or negative
impact on the efficiency and accuracy of the analysis. Roughly 30 minutes were
taken to complete this questionnaire. Finally, after reviewing the results, we
communicated them to participants and asked for (unstructured) feedback.
3.4
Qualitative Coding Approach
We are not aware of prior studies with a scope similar to ours. Given the unstruc-
tured nature of the justifications, we adopted hybrid coding approach, mostly
reliant on inductive reasoning, but for which we followed high-level guidelines.
Coders. Three reviewers (R1, R2, R3) participated in the qualitative as-
sessment. R1 had access to contextual information provided by the participating
SOC, enabling accurate interpretation of explanations; R2 is a security researcher
with a decade of experience in this research domain, and who also has SOC work
experience (in a different SOC); R3 is a security researcher with >5 years of ex-
perience in the operational security research domain. Importantly, R1 and R2
also contributed in the selection of the six cases considered in our study.
Workflow. After administering the study, the responses were first inspected
by R1: for this preliminary assessment, R1 interacted with R2 to determine how
to handle specific occurrences (e.g., “what if a participant writes ‘no more time’
in the open-text? Should it count as a ‘N/A’ or as a wrong answer?”). Then, the
coders used their own judgment to assign their codes to the responses. To avoid
bias, R3 never interacted with R1: R3 only used the detailed information on each
case (reported in the supplementary material). With regard to R2, given that
the study was done in German (the language of the SOC), machine-generated
translations were provided to guide the assessment (whereas R1 and R3 are fluent
in German). Once all coders assigned their codes, the opinions were compared,
showing that coders were generally in agreement (there was consensus in 82%
of the codes). Discrepancies were resolved via synchronous and asynchronous
communication, with R2 acting as middle point. Decisions were finalized in a
final meeting between R1 and R2, during which some initial codes by R1 changed.
Hence, even though R1 had the final call, the collective contribution of all coders
was essential to maximise interpretative quality and derive accurate results.
Guidelines. To assign codes, we established two rules: first, an answer was
treated as “N/A” if it was left empty or if provided no form of technical as-
sessment (e.g., “no time”); second, if the alert was classified incorrectly, then
the explanation is never considered as correct (to avoid biasing our results).5
Then, each coder used their own judgment to assign codes. At a high-level,
when analysing each response, we sought to answer two questions: (a) “does the
5 We still inspected these answers, confirming our choice (explanations were not valid).

12
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
Table 2: Distribution of classification-explanation result types across all participants.
Classification
Explanation
n (72)
%
Correct
Correct
22
31%
Correct
Incorrect / Vague
35
48%
Correct
Missing
3
4%
False / Missing
–
12
17%
text show understanding of the reason why the alarm was classified in a spe-
cific way?” and (b) “is the explanation of use to another security analyst?”. A
positive answer to either of these two questions would typically lead to a valid
explanation (✓). This is because we are not merely interested in determining if,
e.g., the answer is “just” correct,6 rather we want to see if the analyst is aware of
what is going on in the monitored environment. We note that participants were
explicitly told to be as specific as possible when motivating their decisions.
4
Results
We first examine the relationship between analysts’ classification performance
and their ability to provide accurate and technically grounded justifications (§4.1).
Finally, we investigate differences in the difficulty of evaluating false positives (§4.2).
4.1
Accuracy and Quality of Analysts’ Explanations (RQ1)
We provide the results on the relationship between participants’ classification de-
cisions and corresponding justifications. Classification represents the correctness
of the final decision (true/false positive), while justification refers to providing
a valid explanation that describes the actual technical cause of the alert. We re-
call (§3.3) that participants were given clear instructions (and should also have
known) about how to justify their choices.
Overall Performance Patterns. Across all six cases and 12 participants (72
total decisions), we identified four distinct outcome types. As shown in Table 2,
22 decisions (31%) included both a correct classification and a correct expla

[…middle truncated for length…]

truggle with dealing with large volumes
of data. Hence, we conjecture that wrong or missing explanations are the result
of difficulties in structuring information rather than from a lack of data.

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
15
Answer to RQ1: Our results show a disconnect between analysts’ ability to
classify alerts correctly vs. their ability to provide correct and evidence-based
explanations for their decisions. Correct classifications were guided by intuition
rather than by the identification and articulation of the technical indicators.
4.2
Differential Difficulty Across False Positive Types (RQ2)
Our second RQ investigates whether certain types of false positives are more
difficult to evaluate and what characteristics make these cases challenging.
Contextual Differences in Performance. We refer to Table 3, showing the
classification accuracy per case (“C” column). The results show substantial varia-
tions. For instance, all twelve participants correctly classified Case 1, while only
nine classified Cases-3-4-5 correctly. The differences can hardly be explained
via randomness:8 each case is semantically different (see Table 1). Cases can
be grouped according to structural features: (a) clear false (Case 1) and true
(Case 6) positives involved distinct signatures (e.g., known scanner identity and
malware quarantined by EDR), which required minimal contextual inference;
(b) context-dependent false positives (Case 2) depended on internal business
logic not encoded in the log data, and required further investigation or knowl-
edge to be properly explained (c) ambiguous and mixed-signal false positives
(Case 4, Case 5) required cross-field correlation and interpretation of indicators
distributed across the dataset, which makes them the hardest to explain and
least reliably classified; whereas (d) true positives with distributed indicators
(Case 3) required participants to correlate information across multiple log fields
to reconstruct the blocked C&C communication attempt, wherein classification
accuracy was relatively high and explanation quality varied.
Structural Characteristics Driving Difficulty. We identified a set of struc-
tural alert features that consistently influenced both classification accuracy and
explanation quality: (1) Indicator Dispersion: cases with indicators spread across
multiple log fields (e.g., Case 5) showed higher cognitive load. Participants had
to synthesize information such as timestamps, IP relationships, behavior indi-
cators, and log-source metadata. Several participants failed to understand these
signals, which lead either to misclassifications or correct classifications with in-
correct explanations; (2) High Log Volume: Case 4 contained over 31,000 events,
which is much larger compared to other cases. While the cause (Windows con-
nectivity tests) was considered benign, the large volume increased perceived
complexity. Participants showed uncertainty regarding which events were rele-
vant, which lead to them focusing on irrelevant fields; (3) Contextual Ambiguity:
Some false positives required organizational knowledge, which is not part of the
alerts themselves. Case 2 demonstrates that correct classifications were common
8 A binomial stat test reveals (p<.05) that participants are not answering randomly.
Moreover, comparing, e.g., Case 1 and Case 3 with a McNemar’s test shows that if
the two cases were equally difficult, then results at least as imbalanced as observed
would occur ≈8% of the time. The same holds for, e.g., Case 1 and Case 4 (or 5).

16
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
but explanations were almost always incorrect. This shows that contextual false
positives are still difficult to deal with even in cases when technically trivial; and
(4) Similarity to Attack Patterns: false positives that represent real attacks (e.g.,
retransmissions or unusual domain redirects) created hesitation among partici-
pants. They frequently misinterpreted harmless behavior as threatening unless
an anchor (e.g., scanner identity, benign domain reputation) was obvious.
Cognitive and Organizational Factors Relevant to Difficulty. Several
cognitive and environmental factors also influenced perceived difficulty. Time
pressure was the reason the analysis was cut short, which led analysts to fix-
ate on initial indicators. Furthermore, participants stated that tool navigation
challenges made it difficult to identify relevant fields even when visible. This
was also the case with mental models of the network, which led participants to
misinterpret IP relationships or misunderstand system roles. Finally, heuristic
shortcuts often replaced systematic reasoning, particularly in unclear cases. Note
that such feedback was not meant as a critique to our study setup, but rather,
to the overarching problem of routinely triaging alerts in their SOC.
Cross-Participant Patterns. The experiences of top and bottom performers
further elaborated case difficulty. Top performers recognize case structure early
and adjust their strategy accordingly. Bottom performers relied on single-field
inspection or their prior experiences. Interestingly, participants with high IT
experience struggled with contextual cases. This suggests that the reason behind
this difficulty are the properties of the alert and not analysts themselves.
Answer to RQ2: Across our six cases, there is a substantial difference in the
classification correctness of our participants. Our results suggest that triaging
certain alarms requires different mental load: some alerts offer clear techni-
cal anchors, while others require complex and often contextual interpretation.
Triaging became challenging when relevant indicators were not evident (e.g.,
spread across multiple log sources, or embedded in high-volume data). These
characteristics reduced analysts’ ability to classify (and explain) alerts reliably.
5
Discussion and Implications
5.1
Lessons Learned and Limitations
Lessons Learned. We identify three major takeaways.
• Our study suggests that our analysts’ decision-making processes are shaped
based on the provided information rather than by the complexity of its the root
causes. Several cases demonstrated that even routine false positives became
difficult in cases when contextual cues were scattered, incomplete or presented
in a format that required significant manual efforts and reconstruction. On
the other hand, technically complex alerts could be handled reliably whenever
relevant attributes were “obvious” and provided to the analysts in a coherent
way. Thus, we argue that the practical bottleneck in SOC triage is not the
volume of data, but how the data is organized and presented.

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
17
• A second lesson learned relates to time management. Most participants re-
ported that the allotted time was not enough (although two said otherwise),
which impacted their performance. This is a valid observation. Yet, time man-
agement is a crucial component in SOCs. In fast-paced environments, such as
SOCs, it is imperative to make decisions quickly (and accurately). The fact
that some cases required “more time” highlights (i) that some alarms are
harder to triage—supporting RQ2; but also (ii) that the way information is
provided to the analyst is not optimal. Nonetheless, after receiving feedback,
some participants stated they learned new knowledge from this exercise.
• The third lesson learned stems from the fact that, in our study, no AI-driven
assistance was received. More specifically, the considered SOC, at the time of
our study, did not have operational AI-powered systems (e.g., RAG or LLMs).
Moreover, in the pre-study questionnaire, five participants stated that “they
use AI but feel unsafe doing so”, whereas the remaining seven stated that they
do not use AI (although five reported they are unsure of whether AI is useful
in their context). We believe that such a divergence underpins an operational
dilemma: AI could be used to better organize the information scrutinized by
the analyst, but analysts themselves do not (at the time of our study) see AI
as a trustworthy assistant—at least for security-sensitive tasks.
Limitations. We discuss potential critiques that could be made to our research.
• SLR. The paper-collection phase of our SLR was done by one author who
double checked the results, whereas the qualitative analysis was done by two
authors to minimise bias and increase correctness. Our search queries should
be specific enough to capture all works relevant to answer RQ0, but to avoid
missing relevant works we also checked if, among the references in the con-
sidered papers, we could find titles that indicated works relevant for RQ0. To
the best of our knowledge, our SLR is exhaustive.
• Sample size. It would be unfair to criticize our study for the “small sample
size”. It is well-known that publicly-available and up-to-date information on
how SOCs are run internally, as well as what data flows through their SIEMs
and what alarms are triggered, can hardly be found. Indeed, SOC-related re-
search is mostly driven by direct collaboration with operational SOCs [59,5,29].
Such studies are, therefore, particularly challenging to carry out—because
finding agreements with professionals is not simple in the general sense [28,25],
and particularly so when the subject of discussion is security-sensitive content.
Consequently, user studies in a SOC setting are relatively small scale see our
repository [1]. In contrast, in other domains (e.g., phishing) valid participants
can be regular employees [4] or internet users [64], enabling a broader coverage
and facilitating generalizations. The size of our sample (12) aligns with the
average of extant literature, and our sample is larger than that of the closest
work [29] (which has 4). As we wrote (§2.3), we do not claim generalizability.
• Selection of Cases. In designing our study, we were time-constrained. Given
that each participant had to partake in a debriefing phase, as well as in the pre-
/post-questionnaires (which required ≈90 minutes altogether), we could not
put dozens of cases. This inevitably forced us to handpick a select number of

18
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
cases that exhibited enough variety to answer our RQs. We acknowledge that
our selection may have been driven by subjectivity. However, given that we are
not claiming generalizable results, we do not believe that our choices would
threaten the validity of our conclusions. Nonetheless, we provide additional
information on selected cases in our repository [1]: such information can be
useful to future work for designing studies similar to ours.
• Individual setting. Analysts were required to work without interacting with
colleagues, which is a common practice in SOC workflows. We isolated indi-
vidual reasoning to avoid cross-influence, but this also removes the social mech-
anisms (e.g., discussion, verification, escalation) that mitigate uncertainty. In
regards to the provided explanation, these were deliberately open-ended (to
differentiate from [29]). The downside is that correctness assessment depen-
dent on qualitative (mostly inductive) coding. To mitigate this, we adopted a
three-party reviewing system (see §3.4), which also involved the cooperation
of the examined SOC, before drawing our conclusions.
• Trustworthiness. A tacit assumption is that our participants carried out this
exercise faithfully. All participants were properly debriefed on the expectations
of our study (and we were available to provide guidance during the exercise),
but we had no control on whether participants truly did their best in our field
exercise. For ethical reasons, there was no incentive in performing well.
Finally, we reiterate that this work was done in cooperation with the examined
SOC. This peculiarity substantially increased the ecological validity of our study:
first, because of the selection of appropriate cases and the overall design of the
experiment; second, because of the qualitative evaluation. Indeed, discrepancies
among coders were resolved by reviewing the examined SOC’s specific context.
Importantly, the major findings of our work go against what would be expected
of any SOC’s desiderata (i.e., the fact that analysts cannot properly explain their
decisions can be seen as a weak point), which is why we argue that our results
are not biased/affected by potential conflicts of interests.
5.2
Positioning within Extant Work
Prior studies (e.g., [5,36,46]) have primarily examined analysts’ practices at a
conceptual or procedural level (e.g., mapping workflows, documenting cognitive
challenges or highlighting organizational constraints). These works provide broad
insights into how analysts report making decisions but they do not characterize
how well analysts reason about alerts when provided with the concrete technical
evidence. Hence, we focus not on perceived obstacles or self-reported strategies,
but on the observable reasoning behavior when practitioners engage with real
alerts from their operational environment. This shift from descriptive accounts
to empirical evaluation allows for better understanding of SOC decision-making.
Earlier evaluations that included participants in hands-on tasks, such as
the simulations in [65,66] or the alert relevance assessments in [32], focused
on whether participants could identify suspicious activity. These studies aim to
showcase analysts’ general ability to detect threats. However, they do not exam-
ine how analysts formulate their interpretations. In contrast, our work uncovers a

Can SOC Operators Explain their Decisions while Triaging Alarms?
19
remarkable difference between selecting the correct classification and articulating
a technically accurate explanation. This distinction matters because SOC work-
flows depend not only on correct decisions but also on coherent documentation
for handovers, incident reports and auditability. These are are all components
that, to our knowledge, prior studies did not empirically measure.
Let us compare our findings with those of Kersten et al. [29], whose field
exercise included 10 alerts, each analysed by 4 analysts. Out of 40 responses,
36 were correct (all subjects correctly classified 9 out of 10 alerts). Of the 4
misclassifications, 3 were for “interesting” alerts, which implied more complex
cases to triage; these results somewhat align with ours. Overall, the median time
to investigate an alert was 10 minutes; however, the authors of [29] state that
“It is likely that SOC analysts analyze these incidents faster in the SOC than
in our experiment as we employed a think-aloud protocol”, thereby explaining
why participants took more time than in our study. We could not find specific
details about the correctness of the explanations. However, and crucially, we cite
the following excerpt: “we found that all errors but one were due to differences
in the experiment setup from the operational setup the analysts are used to.”
5.3
Recommendations
The topmost pain-point mentioned by our participants refers to the way infor-
mation is presented. Hence a recommendation is to improve data presenta-
tion/visualization (e.g., [58]). This can be achieved by consolidating key in-
dicators, contextual attributes and historical data within SOC platforms. Such
a suggestion can also encompass automated enrichment processes (e.g., embed-
ding asset metadata, known business processes or recent infrastructure changes
directly into the alert) as well as explainable-AI techniques (e.g., [59]).
Furthermore, we recommend SOC engage in activities similar to
those in our work. The poor performance of our participants may also stem
from a lack of experience in explaining decisions in an open-text format. It is
possible that analysts knew the reason why an alert was (or not) an FP, but they
formulated their thoughts poorly. More frequent “explanation-based” exercises
could reinforce the analysts’ abilities to communicate their operational decisions.
Finally, the difficulty of triaging different alarms can vary significantly. As
a result, SOC improvement efforts should not treat all alerts equally. Instead,
alerts that repeatedly caused uncertainty (e.g., those requiring cross-system cor-
relations or business knowledge) should be prioritized. This could include ad-
justing SIEM rules, improving documentation, or integrating clearer
contextual indicators. Moreover, an argument can also be made on the im-
portance of periodic review sessions, which can be used to retroactively identify
the most common “trivial” or “relevant” alerts are encountered by analyst.
6
Conclusions
Our real-world field study with 12 SOC analysts shows that while analysts gener-
ally make correct triage decisions, they often struggle to explain them. We used

20
Jessica Moosmann, Irdin Pekaric, and Giovanni Apruzzese
six operational alarm cases drawn directly from the SOC’s production environ-
ment, wherein we observed that 83% of classifications were correct. However,
only fewer than half of the explanations aligned with the true root cause. Some
of the alarms were harder to reason about, regardless that analysts had a full
access to the standard SIEM, case-management tools and asset context. This
indicates that the core challenge lies in interpreting and articulating context
rather than the availability of data. Our findings expose a practical risk for SOC
operations, where transparent decision-making is of utmost importance.
Future work can use our experimental approach and findings to carry out
similar studies in similar (or different) SOCs. We cannot claim that the analysts
of all SOCs are unable to provide the right justification. Yet, our SLR showed
that limited attention has been given to such a pivotal aspect of a SOC’s work-
flow. More research is needed to further explore this operational dimension.