Author's version, accepted for the workshop “Test Methods and Reliability of Circuits and Systems” (TuZ-2026)
Horizontal SCA Attacks on Binary kP Algorithms 
using Chevallier-Mames Atomic Blocks 
Gerald Isheanesu Matungamire1,3, Alkistis Aikaterini Sigourou1, Gerrit Schrock1,2, Zoya Dyka1,3, Peter Langendoerfer3 and 
Ievgen Kabin1 
1 IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics, Frankfurt (Oder), Germany
2 Nordhausen University of Applied Sciences, Nordhausen, Germany 
3 BTU Cottbus-Senftenberg, Cottbus, Germany 
{matungamire, sigourou, schrock, dyka, langendoerfer, kabin}@ihp-microelectronics.com
Abstract— Scalar multiplication kP is the operation most 
frequently targeted in Elliptic Curve (EC) cryptosystems. To 
protect against single-trace Side-Channel Analysis (SCA) attacks, 
the atomicity principle and various atomic block patterns have 
been proposed in the past. In this work we use our software and 
hardware implementations to demonstrate that binary right-to-
left and left-to-right kP algorithms, when implemented with 
Chevallier-Mames atomic block patterns, are still vulnerable to 
single-trace SCA attacks. The vulnerability remains true for the 
left-to-right 
kP 
algorithm 
with 
projective 
coordinate 
randomization. 
Keywords— Elliptic Curve (EC), kP, Side-Channel Analysis 
(SCA) attacks, atomic block, atomic patterns, Simple SCA. 
I. INTRODUCTION
Elliptic curves (EC) are the basis of cryptographic protocols 
for the exchange of secret keys, authentication and digital 
signature approaches. The most time and energy consuming 
operation in EC cryptosystems is the EC point-scalar 
multiplication, denoted as kP operation (where k is a scalar and 
P is a point on an EC). This operation is mostly attacked with 
the goal of revealing the value of the secret scalar k. Side-
channel analysis (SCA) attacks exploit side-channel effects that 
can be measured during the targeted kP execution, for example, 
current drawn from the power supply or electromagnetic (EM) 
radiation emitted by the attacked chip. Analysing the power or 
the EM trace, attackers can reveal the scalar k. The resistance of 
kP algorithms to single-trace attacks remains an issue despite 
many countermeasures proposed in the past. The atomicity 
principle is a countermeasure strategy based on the 
representation of kP operations as a series of small blocks of 
mathematical operations. The notation “atomic block” was 
introduced in [1], proposing decomposing the kP operation into 
many small atomic blocks: each block performs the same 
sequence of operations causing similar energy consumption 
over the same execution time, i.e. the shapes of the atomic 
blocks are very similar to each other. Attackers do not know 
which block refers to the processing of ‘0’ bit value in the binary 
representation of k, and which to the ‘1’. A similar idea was 
proposed in [2], before [1]. In [3], [4], [5], the vulnerability of 
kP algorithms implemented using different atomic block 
patterns to single-trace SCA attacks was described. The SCA 
leakages were caused by the data value processed (data-bit) [3] 
or data flow (address-bit) [4] or by their combination [5]. The 
last 
two 
vulnerabilities 
were 
observed 
for 
hardware 
implementations of the atomic patterns [6] and [7]. In this paper, 
we demonstrate that not only a hardware implementation of 
binary kP algorithms using Chevallier-Mames’ atomic patterns 
[1] can be vulnerable to simple SCA, but also software
implementation for microcontrollers, even when implemented
using an open source crypto library with time-constant field
operations.
II. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND MEASUREMENTS
We implemented two binary kP double-and-add algorithms:
the left-to-right and the right-to-left algorithms using atomic 
block patterns for EC point doubling (further denoted as PD, or 
2Q) and EC point addition (further denoted as PA, or Q+P) 
operations as proposed in [1]. Each atomic block consists of: 
multiplication, addition, negation, and addition, known as the 
MANA atomic block. The atomic patterns for a PD and a PA 
consist of 10 and 16 MANA atomic blocks, respectively. The 
sequences of field operations in our hardware and software 
implementations are given in [8]. For our software 
implementation, we selected a TI LAUNCHXL-F28379D 
LaunchPad board [9] with the TMS320F28379D C2000 32-bit 
dual-core microcontroller as the target device and the open-
source cryptographic library FLECC in C [10] due to the 
availability of the constant-time modular arithmetic functions. 
The implementation was done for the NIST EC P-256 [11]. For 
the left-to-right kP algorithms, we implemented two versions: 
without any additional countermeasures (i.e., only atomic blocks 
were the countermeasure) and a version with randomised 
projective coordinates of the point P corresponding to [12]. We 
did not apply the randomisation of the point coordinates in the 
right-to-left kP algorithm. In our hardware implementation, we 
realised only the left-to-right kP algorithm using the previous 
IHP design [5] as a basis and changing the data flow 
corresponding to [1]. All operations were implemented serially 
and described in VHDL using AMD Vivado Design Suite 
v2024.2.1 (64-bit). The design was ported for a Digilent 
Arty Z7-20 board [13] with a Zynq XC7Z020-1CLG400C 
FPGA. 
Measurements of EM emanation during a kP operation were 
performed using a near-field microprobe MFA-R 0.2-75 [14] 
manufactured by Langer. An integrated circuit scanner Langer 
ICS 105 [15] was used to guarantee a precise position and 
orientation of the probe over the board. We measured EM traces 
on the power supply capacitor C49 located on the back side of 
the attacked board, see Fig. 1. The EM trace of a kP execution 
on the attacked FPGA was measured also on a power supply 
capacitor on the back side of the attacked board. The placement 
and orientation of the EM probe are shown in Fig. 2. All 

algorithms were executed using the affine coordinate of the base 
point G of the EC P-256 as inputs. We used a 256-bit-long scalar 
k for FPGA execution andonly the 5-bit-long binary scalar 
k=111112 for all executions on the microcontroller. We used a 
Teledyne LeCroy WavePro 604HD oscilloscope to capture the 
EM trace. The FPGA design runs at 10 MHz, and the trace was 
measured with the oscilloscope’s sampling rate of 1 GS/s. The 
kP execution on the microcontroller (in RAM) was clocked at 
100 MHz and measured with 2.5 GS/s. 
Fig. 1. Measurements of EM trace on the back side of the microcontroller’s 
board: position and orientation of the EM probe are shown, zoomed in. 
Fig. 2. Measurements of EM trace on the back side of the attacked FPGA 
board: position and orientation of the EM probe are shown, zoomed in. 
III. ANALYSIS
A. Vulnerability to simple SCA
Fig. 3 shows a part of the oscilloscope’s waveform for FPGA 
measurement. The shown part corresponds to the execution of a 
PA and a PD. Each PA consists of 16 atomic blocks Δ1, …, Δ16; 
each PD consists of 10 atomic blocks Δ1, … , Δ10. To avoid the 
successful simple SCA attack, the shapes of all atomic blocks 
have to be very similar, but it is clearly visible that the shapes of 
the atomic blocks Δ1-Δ4 and Δ9 in the Q+P differ significantly 
from those of the other atomic blocks. 
Fig. 3. A part of the kP trace measured on the FPGA demonstrating the 
distinguishability of the EC point addition and the EC point doubling patterns 
Fig. 4 shows the first ten atoms of the Q+P operation from 
Fig. 3, zoomed in. Each atom starts with a field multiplication, 
which is the most consuming energy field operation. In our 
implementation, we used the field multiplier based on the 
iterative 4-segment Karatsuba multiplication method adapted 
for the multiplication of prime finite field elements as explained 
in [16]. Corresponding to this method, both 256 bit long 
operands are segmented into 4 parts, each 64 bit long. To 
calculate the field product, nine partial products are calculated 
and accumulated in the output register of the field multiplier. 
Reduction is performed in each clock cycle. If both or even only 
one of the multiplicands is equal to “0” or “1”, the partial 
products such as 0‧0, 0‧1, 1‧1, or x‧1 are calculated consuming 
much less energy than processing 64 bit long multiplicands x‧y. 
These processes determine the shape of the multiplications and 
their distinguishability, see Fig. 4. 
Fig. 4. Atoms Δ1, … , Δ10 of the Q+P operation from Fig. 3, zoomed in. 
Fig. 5 shows the traces measured on the microcontroller. On 
each trace all PDs and PAs are shown. 
Fig. 5. EM traces measured on the microcontroller for kP executions 
implementing: a) – the left-to-right algorithm; b) – the left-to-right kP algorithm 
with randomization of projective coordinates; c) – the right-to-left algorithm. 
In Fig. 5-a) the atomic blocks for a PD and a PA are shown 
also zoomed in, as an example demonstrating their 
distinguishability in the left-to-right algorithm. It is clearly 
visible that the atomic patterns Δ1 and Δ3 in Q+P differ 
significantly from those of all other atomic blocks. For the right-
to-left algorithm (see Fig. 5 - c), the first PD and PA operations 
differ from all other patterns, too. The reasons for the visible 
distinguishability of atomic blocks are primarily due to operand-
dependent energy consumption in field multiplication 
processing small operand values such as 1 and -3, corresponding 
to [1]. Only the left-to-right algorithm with randomization of 
the projective coordinates does not have an easily observable 
distinguisher (see Fig. 5-b), i.e. the shape of all atomic blocks 
appears visually similar in the EM trace. Thus, the well-known 
randomisation of elliptic curve point coordinates proposed by 
[12] as a countermeasure against vertical attacks can also
effectively prevent the simple data-bit SCA attacks by replacing
the special operand values ‘1’ with long binary numbers.
B. Atoms are distinguishable
Additionally, we investigated the distinguishability of
atomic block shapes for the left-to-right kP algorithm with 
randomization of projective coordinates (see trace in Fig. 5-b) at 

the beginning of each atom to prove our assumption that the data 
flow, i.e. the use of different variables for passing data to/from 
a function, can cause distinguishability of the atoms. This kind 
of vulnerability is also known as address-bit side-channel 
leakage phenomena, where the information leakage comes from 
the addresses of registers or memory locations that are accessed 
during execution. Regular binary kP algorithms, such as the 
Montgomery ladder 1, are vulnerable to this kind of attacks 
analysing many kP execution traces [22] as well as a single trace 
[23], at least when implementing kP operation in hardware. 
Atomic patterns [6] are also distinguishable due to the address-
bit phenomenon [24]. Different address randomisation methods 
were proposed in the past [25], [26], [27], [28] and successfully 
broken by analysing a single trace [29], [30]. Some methods 
increasing the resistance of hardware implementations to 
address-bit SCA are proposed in [31]. 
Fig. 6. A part of each atom Δ1, from all four point doubling operations, 
aligned: traces of the atoms are marked in red; template is marked in black. 
The 
nature 
of 
this 
vulnerability 
and 
suitable 
countermeasures have not investigated yet deeply for embedded 
processors and microcontrollers. Only a very few works [24], 
[32], [33] describe such investigations. In our investigation case, 
although the same operations are performed in each atom, 
different variables and data-flow paths lead to different address 
accesses. This can cause observable but very short – only a few 
clock cycles long – SCA leakage at the start of field operation 
functions, which allows distinguishing between atoms. Thus, we 
selected only 24 clock cycles at the beginning of the first atom 
in the first PD as a template for the comparison of all other 
atoms. Fig. 6 shows a part of each atom Δ1 in each PD (red 
lines). The traces are aligned. The part of the first atom Δ1, 
which we selected as template, is marked in black. All atoms Δ1 
have a very similar shape at their beginning, i.e. a high 
correlation with the template is expected. We compared the 
template with the corresponding parts of other atoms in PDs. A 
similar shape was observed not for all of them but only for atoms 
Δ2, Δ4 and Δ7. Fig. 7 shows a part of each atom Δ3 in each PDs 
(red lines). The traces are aligned and the template is shown as 
black line (the same template as in Fig. 7). All atoms Δ3 have a 
very similar shape at their beginning, but it differs from the 
template in a few clock cycles significantly. Similar differences 
are observable for other atoms in PDs. 
Fig. 7. A part of each atom Δ3 (red lines), from all four PD operations, 
aligned; template is marked in black. 
Based on these observations, we decided to use the template 
for the calculation of Pearson coefficients for each 24 clock 
cycles long part of the measured trace to determine all very 
1 It is the notation for kP algorithms based on [17]. Please note that the 
Montgomery ladder is known as resistant to timing and simple SCA attacks 
similar shapes. Thus, we calculated Pearson’s coefficients for 
the whole trace, see Fig. 8-a). The calculated coefficients are 
mostly in the range of -0.5…0.7, and only a few of them are 
close to 1.0. We marked the coefficients higher than 0.9 with red 
dotted lines. 
Fig. 8. Distinguishability of PD and PA operations in the left-to-right kP 
algorithm with randomization of projective coordinates: a) - Pearson 
coefficients calculated for template and each 24 clock cycles long part of the 
measured trace; red dotted lines show the coefficients higher than 0.9; 
b) – labeled measured trace.
The distinguishability of PD and PA operations using the 
marked correlation coefficients is demonstrated in Fig. 8-b). 
Each Δ1, Δ2, Δ4, and Δ7 exhibits a high correlation with the 
template during PD, while in PA, only atom Δ1 maintains this 
correlation. Conversely, atoms Δ2, Δ4, and Δ7 do not show the 
same relationship. Additionally, the duration of Q+P is longer 
than 2Q. These facts can be successfully exploited to 
distinguish between the atomic patterns and extract the 
processed scalar. In our investigations, we focused on a scalar 
contatining all ‘1’, implying that a Q+P operation follows every 
2Q operation. For other scalars, this is not the case; processing 
the bit value ‘0’ requires only a 2Q operation and processing 
the bit value ‘1’ requires the sequence of a 2Q and a Q+P 
operations. 
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we evaluated the distinguishability of 
Chevallier-Mames atomic block patterns in binary kP 
algorithms. Both our hardware and software implementations 
are vulnerable to single-trace SCA attacks. The field 
multiplication of special small operands is the reason for data-
bit vulnerability, which can be easily observed and exploited for 
key extraction when left-to right algorithm is selected for the 
implementation. Additionally, we demonstrated that the 
projective coordinate randomization proposed by Coron [12] 
can successfully countermeasure this vulnerability but can not 
prevent the address-bit SCA leakage. We utilize portions of the 
measured traces related to data transmission in field 
multiplications as templates to recognize atomic patterns 
associated with PD and PA operations. Addressing of different 
registers is the reason for this vulnerability and remains 
exploitable 
even 
when 
using 
projective 
coordinate 
randomization. Please note that not only field multiplications but 
also field additions can be potentially such SCA leakage 
sources, too. Using the proposed here template, the results 
published in [24], [32], [33] investigating other atomic patterns, 
[18], [19], [20], assuming that key-dependent addressing of different registers 
is indistinguishable from SCA point of view [21]. 

[6], [7], [34] can be improved. Additionally, atomic patterns 
[35], can be very promising and have to be investigated as well.