Introducing the Cyber-Physical Data Flow Diagram to Improve Threat Modelling of
Internet of Things Devices
Simon Liebl 1,2
, Ian Ferguson 2
, Andreas Aßmuth 3
, Natalie Coull 2
, George R. S. Weir 4
1 emgarde, Ebermannsdorf, Germany
e-mail: simon.liebl@emgarde.de
2 Abertay University, Dundee, UK
e-mail: ti.ferguson | n.coullu@abertay.ac.uk
3 Kiel University of Applied Sciences, Kiel, Germany
e-mail: andreas.assmuth@haw-kiel.de
4 University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK
e-mail: george.weir@strath.ac.uk
Abstract—A growing number of Internet of Things (IoT) devices
are used across consumer, medical, and industrial domains. They
interact with their environment through sensors and actuators
and connect to networks such as the Internet. Because sensors
may collect sensitive data and actuators can trigger physical
actions, security, privacy, and safety are major challenges. Threat
modelling can help identify risks, but established IT-focused
methods transfer to the IoT only to a limited extent. In this paper,
a new modelling technique specifically for IoT devices called Cyber-
Physical Data Flow Diagram (CPDFD) is proposed that also allows
modelling of hardware with the aim to support manufacturers
in identifying threats and developing countermeasures. The
technique was examined through an experimental study and
a survey with interviews. The results suggest that numerous other
attack scenarios can be found through the modelling technique,
improving the identification of threats to IoT devices.
Keywords-Security; Internet of Things; Embedded Systems;
Threat Modelling; Cyber-Physical Data Flow Diagram.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the interconnection of billions
of devices via the Internet or another network. These devices are
used in a wide variety of areas, such as the smart home, medical,
and industrial applications. Their key characteristics include
interacting with the environment via sensors and actuators and
communicating with other devices and systems. Networking
them aims to extend functionality, integrate services, improve
usability, increase efficiency, and reduce costs. However, adding
multiple network interfaces also expands the attack surface and
increases the risk of cyber attacks. It seems that the number of
published incidents is steadily increasing [1], indicating that
IoT security is a serious problem. In recent years, incidents
have been reported in various IoT application fields, such as
industrial (e.g., attacks on Ukraine’s power grid [2]), medical
(e.g., insulin pumps and ventilators [3]), automotive (e.g., hack
of Tesla and its Wall Connector [4][5]), infrastructure (e.g.,
traffic lights [6]), and smart home (e.g., vacuum robot [7]).
The described small sample of security incidents related
to IoT devices and systems shows that there is a systematic
problem threatening security, privacy, and safety. Therefore,
new approaches are required to better protect IoT devices
from such threats. A promising approach that is already
established in the IT domain is the risk assessment using
threat modelling. Threat modelling is the systematic approach
to identifying threats and vulnerabilities to a particular system.
Appropriate countermeasures can then be defined. The process
can also be carried out early in the product lifecycle, which
supports the goal security by design. However, common threat
modelling approaches from the IT domain cannot necessarily be
adopted to IoT devices. Reasons for this are that IoT devices
consist of resource-constrained embedded systems and that
their interaction with the real world poses an increased risk
to the privacy and safety of users. As part of this work, the
modelling technique Data Flow Diagram (DFD), which is often
used in threat modelling, was specifically examined. Several
adaptations are proposed to increase the applicability of DFDs
to IoT devices, including two new elements and the possibility
to create a Hardware Diagram (HWD). This extension, called
Cyber-Physical Data Flow Diagram (CPDFD), has the aim
to enable more detailed modelling of the components of IoT
devices and thus allow better threat identification compared
to regular DFDs. This technique is intended to support device
manufacturers in identifying threats and developing appropriate
countermeasures.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in
Section II, the fundamentals of IoT devices and threat modelling
are provided. Section III presents related work regarding IoT
security, threat modelling, and DFDs. In Section IV, the
proposed extension CPDFD is introduced. The methodology
for evaluating CPDFDs consisting of two studies is described
in Section V, followed by the presentation of the results. These
results are then discussed in Section VII. The paper ends with
conclusions in Section VIII.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Internet of Things Devices
The IoT is a “group of infrastructures interconnecting
connecting objects and allowing their management, data mining
and the access to the data they generate” [8]. These objects
are devices extended with network connectivity and computing
capabilities and require usually minimal human intervention
[9]. The architecture of the IoT is often structured into different
Please cite as: Simon Liebl, Ian Ferguson, Andreas Aßmuth, Natalie Coull, and George R. S. Weir, “Introducing the
Cyber-Physical Data Flow Diagram to Improve Threat Modelling of Internet of Things Devices,” in Proc of the First
International Conference on Cross-Domain Security in Distributed, Intelligent and Critical Systems (CROSS-SEC 2026), Lisbon,
Portugal, pp. 30–39, April 2026.
arXiv:2604.22307v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

layers [10]. The perception layer, the lowest layer, consists of
these physical objects, such as sensors, actuators, or Radio-
Frequency Identification (RFID) tags. These device are also
used in a Cyber-Physical System (CPS), for example, to control
physical processes in the real world [11]. For such systems,
real-time requirements are essential, which differentiates them
clearly from IT systems. The impact of IoT devices can thus
affect security, privacy, and safety and have consequences such
as the disclosure of sensitive data in medical applications or
human injury in industrial applications.
IoT devices are embedded systems, which are specific
computer systems built for a custom purpose. Their basic com-
ponents consist of hardware, software, and data [12]. Examples
for hardware components are microcontroller, memory chip,
Printed Circuit Board (PCB), security chip, power supply, and
various sensors and actuators. Software components include
firmware, basic libraries for cryptography and logging, and
protocol stacks for numerous IoT protocols, such as Bluetooth,
ZigBee, and MQTT. Besides firmware, devices store access
data, keys, and configuration and log files, among others.
B. Threat Modelling
In this section, the DFD and two published threat modelling
techniques are introduced. The small excerpt of techniques is
necessary to understand the remainder of this paper.
1) Data Flow Diagram: The DFD is a graphical modelling
technique used historically in the field of software engineering
and system analysis [13]. It quickly gained popularity due to
its intuitive nature and ability to capture both high-level and
detailed views of system processes and data. A DFD consists
only of four elements: Process, Data Store, External Entity,
and Data Flow. This enables a simple visual representation of
complex systems and illustrates how data is input, processed,
stored, and output. Processes represent the transformation of
data and can be thought of any running code. Data stores
depict any type of data storage, such as files or databases.
External entities are used to describe external data sources or
destinations, e.g., people or any code outside your control. Data
flows are used to connect the other three elements. Besides
their use in software engineering, security experts found their
application also valuable in the field of cyber security. The
analysis of the system is an important part of a security
assessment conducted to find threats and vulnerabilities. In
order to limit the assessment for complex systems, another
element called Trust Boundary or Trust Area was added to
visualise different trust levels, initiating the second version
of DFDs [14]. Since DFDs are typically created during early
design, they naturally support the analysis of architectural
security issues rather than implementation-level defects.
2) STRIDE and LINDDUN: The CIA triad – Confidentiality,
Integrity, and Availability – forms the basis of information
security, often complemented by goals such as authenticity,
non-repudiation, and authorisation. STRIDE covers the threats
spoofing, tampering, repudiation, information disclosure, denial
of service, and elevation of privilege [14], and was developed
at Microsoft to identify such threats during design [15]. It
maps directly to these six security goals.
STRIDE can be applied to DFDs, but checking all six threats
for every element is time-consuming. Since some elements
are more susceptible to specific threats, STRIDE-per-Element
and STRIDE-per-Interaction were introduced to streamline the
analysis [14].
LINDDUN is a framework for privacy threat modelling.
Similar to STRIDE, LINDDUN is an acronym that stands
for linkability, identifiability, non-repudiation, detectability,
disclosure of information, unawareness, and non-compliance
and can be combined with DFDs as well [16]. The threats are
therefore not focused on security goals, but are instead aimed
at privacy goals.
III. RELATED WORK
IoT security and privacy is still a huge problem, which
is why a lot of research is being conducted in a variety of
directions. Due to the many articles around IoT security, there
are several reviews with the aim to summarise, among others,
threats, attacks, challenges, and solutions [17]–[21]. Some
researchers focused specifically on IoT devices, often using
hands-on approaches to show how embedded systems can be
attacked, which threats arise, and how they can be mitigated
[22]–[26]. Regarding threat modelling and risk assessment,
there are a couple of articles with the aim of adapting these
methods for the IoT. In [27], they aim to automate this process
for IoT systems by providing their own methodology. The
authors of [28] present a STRIDE and DFD-based threat
modelling approach specifically for CPSs with special focus on
human injury, equipment damage as well as black-out. Many
articles address specific fields of application such as automotive
[29], building and home automation [30], agriculture [31], and
healthcare devices [32]. DFDs are also relevant to this work. In
this regard, [33] and [34] are particularly worth mentioning, as
they propose adjustments to DFDs with the aim of improving
threat identification and generation.
In summary, there is a lot of research in the area of IoT
security and privacy, also with special emphasis on threat
modelling. In the case of IoT devices in particular, the
differences between embedded systems and IT systems were
recognised and threats analysed that emerge through sensors,
actuators, and interaction with the environment and other
systems. However, the hands-on approaches and the various
methods for the different IoT applications emphasise that a
common technique for modelling IoT devices has not yet been
established.
IV. CYBER-PHYSICAL DATA FLOW DIAGRAM
This section introduces the proposed modelling technique
CPDFD by describing its aims and adaptations.
A. Aim
As mentioned before, there are several issues with modelling
IoT devices. One big difference between IT and IoT applica-
tions is the interaction with the physical world. While this is an

integral part of the latter, it is hardly present in IT applications.
In IoT systems, a sensor, the data source, usually measures an
environmental value, such as temperature, photographic picture,
or heart activity. The processing of the data can in turn lead
to physical operations by the actuator, the data sink, and thus
result in changes in the environment. For example, a valve is
opened, a car battery is charged, or a door is unlocked. From a
security point of view, these sensor values and actuator actions
are particularly interesting, as they can threaten the privacy
and safety of users. It is therefore necessary to address this
difference, the interaction with the physical environment, also
in the modelling.
Another difference between IT and IoT applications is
the location and purpose. IoT devices are used in critical
applications, such as healthcare, automotive, and automation.
Many of them are placed outdoors, e.g., security cameras,
charging stations, or pipeline valves. The criticality as well
as the accessibility of the devices make hardware attacks
interesting for attackers and are frequently reported [35].
Successful attacks give deep insight into the device and often
lead to access to Intellectual Property (IP), sensitive data,
credentials, and cryptographic secrets. Therefore, hardware
attacks, which are often out of scope in IT applications, need
to be considered due to the accessibility and the frequent critical
application.
One core element of IoT devices is the communication
with other devices and systems. Besides dozens of wireless
communication protocols, such as Z-Wave, Wi-Fi, and NFC,
wired protocols including Modbus, Ethernet, and USB are
commonly used. Additionally, several common protocols used
in embedded systems are used, for instance, UART, RS-232,
and JTAG. With the multitude of protocols and interfaces in
use, it is therefore easy to lose track which of them are actually
utilised in an IoT device. However, these various protocols and
interfaces increase the attack surface and can become a gateway
for attackers. The goal is therefore to be able to represent these
interfaces in a model in order to get a quick overview of the
connectivity of a device.
There is another difference between the development of IoT
devices and IT applications. Modelling the latter is mainly
done by software and network engineers that commonly have
a computer science background. However, modelling an IoT
device may also require the help of hardware and embedded
engineers with a background frequently in mechanical or
electrical engineering. Therefore, a modelling technique for IoT
devices needs to be simple and at the same time comprehensive
in order to be applicable by people with different backgrounds.
B. The Technique
As mentioned before, the CPDFD is proposed to support
modelling of IoT devices. The technique extends the DFD,
which is commonly used for security assessments and is
known by many security experts and engineers. The following
paragraphs describe adjustments to the DFD in order to achieve
the previously described aims.
It is difficult to represent the interaction with the physical
environment through sensors and actuators using the five
elements of a DFD. Depending on the sensor characteristics
(e.g., simple electrical resistors or modules with a serial
interface), it can make sense to represent them as Process,
Data Store, or External Entity or even as a combination with
Data Flows. However, this question of detail would take a lot
of time and contradict the principle of simplicity of DFDs. If
one does not know how to represent a specific component right
away, it could be omitted. This in turn would lead to a situation
where measured values which might threaten the privacy, for
example, would not be recorded. This applies analogously
to actuators and safety as a protection goal. It is therefore
proposed to add a new element called Physical Link to the
DFD notation in order to be able to model these interactions
with the physical environment. The goal of this element is to
give sensors and actuators a first-class representation in the
diagrams, highlighting issues with the goals of privacy and
safety.
Another aim of the CPDFD technique is to enable the
creation of hardware models in order to support the iden-
tification of hardware attacks, among others. In theory, there
are dozens of modelling techniques (see [36]). However, the
authors are not aware of any hardware modelling technique that
is commonly used for the threat analysis. Hardware components
were integrated into DFDs in a few cases (e.g., [37][38]). It is
proposed to use the DFD notation to create a separate HWD.
This is achieved by splitting the elements into logical and
physical ones. Regular DFDs are mainly used for modelling
software-related components, which are now referred to as
logical elements. The additional physical elements are used for
the creation of the HWD. The physical data store can be used
to model a flash or One Time Programmable (OTP) memory,
for instance. Likewise, the physical processor and the physical
trust area can be used to model microprocessors and PCBs,
for example. Modelling of data flows is not necessary in the
HWD.
The CPDFD technique should also allow users to get a quick
overview of the device’s communication interfaces. Similar
to the Physical Link before, modelling the interfaces through
one of the standard elements could have the effect that these
are not modelled. It is therefore proposed to model them as a
separate element named Interface as part of the HWD.
All elements of a CPDFD and their use in a DFD and
HWD are shown in Table I. The proposed extension has
further advantages. A DFD can be augmented with links to the
hardware model. For example, for data stores, such as a file,
it can be specified in which memory it is stored and for data
flows, the utilised communication interface can be provided.
This additional context can lead to a more precise description
of an attack scenarios and thus support the threat identification.
The new elements Physical Link and Interface have another
benefit when it comes to software-aided modelling. Threat
rules for automatic threat generation can be specified more
precisely or can be created specifically for the two elements.
This can reduce false positives, i.e., wrongly identified threats,

TABLE I. THE ELEMENTS OF A CPDFD. THE LAST TWO COLUMNS INDICATE THEIR USE IN DFDS AND HWDS.
Element
Symbol
Meaning & Examples
DFD
HWD
Process
Name
Executed code
Log. Process: Code in C, web server
Phy. Processor: Microprocessor, TPM
b
l
l
b
Data Store
Name
Things that store data
Log. Data Store: File, database
Phy. Data Store: FLASH, OTP memory
b
l
l
b
External Entity
Interactor
Name
People or code outside your control
Log. External Entity: Browser, cloud service
Phy. External Entity: User, machine
b
b
l
l
Data Flow
Name
Name
Communication between elements
(Log.) Data Flow: Data flow with protocol (stack)
b
l
Trust Area
Name
Delimited area of trust
Log. Trust Area: Net segment, container
Phy. Trust Area: PCB, casing
b
b
l
b
Physical Link
Name
Link between physical and logical world
Physical Link: Microphone, battery, motor
b
b
Interface
Name
Communication interface
Interface: Wi-Fi, USB, JTAG
l
b
and false negatives, i.e., undetected threats. The commonly
used techniques STRIDE-per-Element and LINDDUN can still
be used for CPDFDs and also provide more accurate results.
Last but not least, the CPDFD technique establishes a unifying
notation for HWDs and DFDs. The resulting diagrams remain
simple and clear, despite the addition of two elements and the
distinction between physical and logical elements. They can be
created and understood by hardware, embedded, and software
engineers and other people as well.
V. METHODOLOGY
The methodology for evaluating the improvements of the CP-
DFD is introduced in this section. It consists of an experimental
study and a survey with interviews.
A. Experimental Study
This section introduces an experimental study with the
objective to compare CPDFDs with DFDs by quantitatively
comparing the number of attack scenarios identified by two
groups, each using one modelling technique. Participants of
the study, who were students of computer science-related study
programmes, were put in the following situation: As innovative
students, they have applied their previously acquired knowledge
in practice and developed a smart IoT device alongside their
studies. They now want to bring the device to market, but they
still have concerns about security and privacy. Therefore, each
participant had the task of examining the device for threats
and vulnerabilities. The analysed device was the open source
device Jaimico [39], which is a combination of voice assistant
and health monitor. The companion robot can be worn on the
shoulders in daily life and can be used as a voice assistant or
health monitor to measure body temperature and heart activity
by connecting to a wearable. In addition to analysing health
data in the cloud, the device offers the special feature of
detecting Covid19 through analysing recorded coughing and
body temperature. In this study, participants were supported
by a custom software tool called TTModeler [40][41], but
the supported modelling technique, specifically the two new
elements, differed for both groups. The modelling technique
thus serves as an independent variable. The produced project
file and a concluding questionnaire served as the data source
for further analysis. For the sake of completeness, it should
be noted that there was a third group with a different software
tool, but this is not of interest for this paper.
The aim of this study is to gather evidence on the usability
of each tool, which is the “degree to which a product or system
can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context
of use” [42]. For this purpose, effectiveness is defined as
“accuracy and completeness with which users achieve specified
goals” and efficiency as the resources expended in relation to
the effectiveness [42]. More precisely, it was measured how
much time is spent on the creation of a specific model and how
many attack scenarios were found in this context, enabling the
quantification in identified attack scenarios per minute for the
hardware model, among others. This can be used to determine
the efficiency. The impact of the additional elements Physical
Link and Interface was specifically examined.
It was decided to conduct the study with students because
they are available at short notice and in larger numbers
than, for example, developers from industry. Students from
study programmes related to computer science were invited
to participate in the study. All participating students were in
the fourth year of their studies. They represent the actual users
well, as they have, for example, only rudimentary experience
in the field of security, as it is the case with many firmware
and software developers. A total of 46 students volunteered to
participate in the study. Five of them took part in a preliminary
study, which was conducted to find issues in the procedure
and task description, and their results are not considered.

This results in a sample size of 41. Due to the omitted third
group and unexpected cancellations, 12 participants used the
modelling technique CPDFD, denoted as GCPDFD, and 14
participants used the DFD technique (GDFD).
Participants first read an information document covering the
CIA, STRIDE, and LINDDUN threat models, as well as IoT
privacy threats defined by [43]. They then received a second
document introducing DFDs, including STRIDE-per-Element,
LINDDUN-per-Element, and example diagrams. Group GCPDFD
received a modified version explaining CPDFD elements
instead of standard DFDs. Next, participants read the de-
scription of the example device Jaimico and watched a video
demonstrating the main features of the assigned tool, including
how to model the “Register device” use case and add threats.
They then worked on the task, with the option to stop at any
time within a three-hour limit. Finally, they completed the
questionnaire and submitted their project file.
The submitted project files and questionnaires served as
the data sources. Project files were analysed for diagrams,
elements, and attack scenarios. Duplicates and out-of-scope
scenarios were marked and excluded. Remaining scenarios were
filtered and labelled as considered attack scenarios. Because
the device description was partly fictitious, scenarios were
classified as having either low or high probability of correctness.
Most were rated high, with exceptions such as “Malicious file
on USB flash drive”, since the USB port was specified as
charging-only. Each scenario was assigned a type: generic,
outlined, or custom, indicating the level of detail and difficulty
of identification. Generic scenarios were directly derived from
STRIDE or LINDDUN, outlined scenarios added some detail
(e.g., “Clear text data storage of the database”), and custom
scenarios were highly specific or not obviously derived from
a threat model (e.g., “Unsecure Bluetooth version”). Only
high-probability scenarios of type outlined or custom were
considered relevant.
The tool was modified to track modelling time. After com-
pleting the task, participants answered a 21-item questionnaire,
including eight items on threat identification and 13 on usability.
The further analysis of the collected data was carried out with
the help of descriptive and inferential statistical methods [44]
and may be visualised using a box plot [45]. The significance
level for rejecting a null hypothesis is set at α “ 5%. Depending
on whether the results are normally distributed, either the t-test
or the Mann-Whitney U test is used to test for a difference
between two groups. Subsequently, Cohen’s d is calculated
to quantify the effect size [46][47]. It can be assumed that
there is a small effect for 0.2 ă d ă 0.5, a medium effect for
0.5 ď d ă 0.8, and a large effect for d ě 0.8.
B. Survey and Interviews
The last study aims to get feedback from people who might
actually utilise CPDFDs. These include device manufacturers as
well as consultancies. Manufacturers often do not have security
experts themselves and therefore hire external companies.
Participants apply the methodology (Thing Threat Modelling
(TTM)), technique (CPDFD), and tool (TTModeler) on their
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANT AND COMPANY CHARACTERISTICS.
Category
Distribution
Company type
8 device manufacturers; 7 service providers
Participant role
9 security experts; 6 engineers
Company size
7 large; 3 medium-sized; 4 small; 1 micro
Field of application 8 industrial; 3 consumer; 2 automotive;
1 medical; 1 infrastructure
Experience
46.7% embedded security; 80.0% DFD;
60.0% threat modelling
own devices and provide afterwards feedback through a
questionnaire and an interview. The aim is to specifically ask
for opinions on the HWD and the new elements.
All persons with a connection to cyber security, IoT, or
embedded systems were invited for the study. In total, 15
participants could be recruited for the study. Table II categorizes
participants according to the type of company, the size of the
company (according to [48]), and the experience. Noteworthy is
that two participants had no cyber security experience (13.3%).
At the start of the study, participants received an introduction
to threat modelling, the adaptations used in this work, and
their task. After completing and evaluating the contributions,
they filled out a questionnaire and answered a few interview
questions. The questionnaire, consisting mainly of five-point
Likert items [49] and free-text fields, together with the interview,
served as the data sources. Questionnaire responses were
analysed descriptively, while the free-text fields and interview
data were examined qualitatively.
VI. RESULTS
The following section summarises the results of both studies.
A. Experimental Study
This section presents the results of the experimental study,
summarised in Table III. The first tests on the results using
the Shapiro-Wilk test showed that the sample is not normally
distributed. This could be caused by the rather small sample
size, for example. It was therefore decided to consistently use
non-parametric methods.
Table III shows the duration needed to conduct the study
for both groups. Note that this duration represents the pure
interaction time with the tool and does not include the learning
time required for the threat models, CPDFD/DFD, and the
introduction to Jaimico. Group GCPDFD has a wide range of 80
to 142 minutes (M “ 111 min, SD “ 20 min). In contrast,
GDFD has a higher mean value of 120 minutes (SD “ 10
min) and a narrower range of 98 to 132 minutes. Despite
these differences, there is a large overlap of the ranges and it
indicates that the technique used does not have a significant
influence on the execution duration (Mann-Whitney U test,
U “ 62.5, p “ .280, p ą α).
The number of considered attack scenarios, i.e., without
duplicates, high probability of correctness and out of scope
(see subsection V-A), have a large range. Participants of GCPDFD
found in total between 2 and 182 attack scenarios (M “ 69.21,
SD “ 40.44) and GDFD found between 2 and 74 scenarios
(M “ 45.17, SD “ 19.85). The scenarios start at 2, as some

TABLE III. OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECT FILE ANALYSIS.
GCPDFD
GDFD
Duration
111 min ˘ 20 min 120 min ˘ 10 min
Considered attack scenarios
69.21 ˘ 40.44
45.17 ˘ 19.85
Type: Generic
19.29 ˘ 22.08
17.92 ˘ 14.64
27.86% ˘ 31.90%
39.67% ˘ 32.41%
Type: Outlined
10.86 ˘ 5.84
9.58 ˘ 7.95
15.69% ˘ 8.44%
21.22% ˘ 17.60%
Type: Custom
39.07 ˘ 17.17
17.67 ˘ 10.00
56.45% ˘ 24.80%
39.11% ˘ 22.15%
Relevant attack scenarios
49.93 ˘ 21.00
27.25 ˘ 11.32
72.14% ˘ 30.34%
60.33% ˘ 25.07%
Goal: Security
44.93 ˘ 19.48
27.00 ˘ 11.14
89.99% ˘ 39.01%
99.08% ˘ 40.89%
Goal: Privacy
5.00 ˘ 2.11
0.25 ˘ 0.45
10.01% ˘ 4.23%
0.92% ˘ 1.66%
Physical Link-related
10.86 ˘ 5.17
21.75% ˘ 10.36%
Interface-related
11.21 ˘ 5.10
22.46% ˘ 10.22%
Model: Hardware
29.07 ˘ 11.28
9.50 ˘ 6.67
58.23% ˘ 22.58%
34.86% ˘ 24.47%
Model: Software
4.29 ˘ 8.09
4.67 ˘ 5.77
8.58% ˘ 16.20%
17.13% ˘ 21.19%
Model: Data flow
16.57 ˘ 8.71
13.08 ˘ 9.40
33.19% ˘ 17.44%
48.01% ˘ 34.51%
Time for hardware model
26 min ˘ 14 min
12 min ˘ 12 min
Time for software model
9 min ˘ 7 min
8 min ˘ 7 min
Time for data flow model
64 min ˘ 21 min
96 min ˘ 17 min
Time per attack scenario
2 min ˘ 0 min
4 min ˘ 0 min
- for hardware model
1 min ˘ 0 min
1 min ˘ 1 min
- for software model
2 min ˘ 2 min
2 min ˘ 2 min
- for data flow model
4 min ˘ 1 min
7 min ˘ 1 min
Note: The values of the last two columns show the mean value and
the standard deviation. Furthermore, the table is split in three sections.
The percentages in the second section refer to the considered attack
scenarios, those in the third section to the relevant attack scenarios.
participants had mainly modelled the example use case showed
in the introductory video. Their type, generic, outlined, and
custom, can be further analysed. The results for the types
generic and outlined are similar and with overlapping error bars
(see Table III). A difference can be seen for the type custom.
The groups GCPDFD and GDFD found on average 39.07 (SD “
17.17) and 17.67 (SD “ 10.00) scenarios respectively. The
Mann-Whitney U test shows that both groups are significantly
different from each other. Therefore, GCPDFD found significantly
more attack scenarios of the high ranked type custom than
GDFD (U “ 155.0, p “ .000, p ď α, dCohen “ 1.50, large
effect). This means that GCPDFD found more scenarios with
high information value that are more difficult to find.
The attack scenarios were filtered again to include only those
of the type outlined and custom as explained in subsection V-A.
This reduced list of relevant attack scenarios is visualised
in Figure 1. The main range of GCPDFD is between 33 and
74 scenarios with two outliers at 2 and 94, while GDFD
ranges between 2 and 39. The ranges overlap, but the boxes
highlighting the lower and upper quartiles do not. The median
of GCPDFD (49) differs from GDFD (30) by 19 scenarios.
The result of the Mann-Whitney U test shows that group
GCPDFD identified significantly more attack scenarios than GDFD
(U “ 147.0, p “ .001, p ď α, dCohen “ 1.32, large effect). This
clearly shows that group GCPDFD, which had the Physical Link
Figure 1. Relevant attack scenarios for groups GCPDFD and GDFD as box plot.
and Interface available, identified substantially more attack
scenarios.
Attack scenarios were categorised whether these threaten the
security or privacy of the device under consideration. Group
GCPDFD identified 5.00 scenarios on average (SD “ 2.11),
while GDFD identified less than 1 scenario on average (M “
0.25, SD “ 0.45). Therefore, they identified significantly
more privacy attack scenarios than GDFD (Mann-Whitney U
test, U “ 160.5, p “ .000, p ď α, dCohen “ 3.01, large
effect). A more detailed analysis shows that out of these 5
scenarios of GCPDFD, 3.64 scenarios were identified through
the element Physical Link (SD “ 1.69), 1.21 through the
Interface (SD “ 0.58), and only 0.14 scenarios through other
elements (SD “ 0.36). Consequently, this suggests that the
used technique, CPDFD or DFD, has an influence on the
identified attack scenarios against privacy.
Figure 2 shows the average number of identified attack
scenarios per group. Furthermore, it highlights how many
scenarios of GCPDFD relate to the additional elements of a
CPDFD – Physical Link and Interface. The comparison of
GCPDFD and GDFD shows that both groups found on average
almost the same number of scenarios for category Others. The
extra scenarios of GCPDFD relate to the new elements. Therefore,
this suggests that further attack scenarios can be found through
the two elements.
Table III includes in which model, hardware, software,
or data flow, the attack scenarios were identified. The main
difference can be seen for the hardware model. Group GCPDFD
has a range of 14 to 45 identified scenarios, without a single
outlier at 2, and a median of 29.5. GDFD has a range of 0 to 19
and a median of 11.5. The Mann-Whitney U test shows that
the groups are significantly different (U “ 156.0, p “ .000,
p ď α, dCohen “ 2.08, large effect). Again, the difference
between GCPDFD and GDFD arises from the two new elements.
The median Physical Link and Interface-related scenarios for
the former are 6 and 10.5 scenarios, respectively. The median
scenarios for the standard elements are 13 and similar to GDFD.
The results indicate that it is worth creating a hardware model
and that there is an improvement due to the new elements.

Figure 2. Average attack scenarios per group. In group GCPDFD, scenarios
relating to the elements Physical Link and Interface are highlighted.
Furthermore, the tool TTModeler tracked how much time
participants spent on creating and analysing the different
models, enabling the calculation of the duration per attack
scenario (see Table III). Group GCPDFD needed on average 2
minutes per scenario (SD “ 0 min), while GDFD needed 4
minutes (SD “ 0 min). The average time per attack scenario
in the hardware model was even less for both groups, because
both needed 1 minute per scenario on average. These scores
indicate the improved efficiency of CPDFDs and also of a
hardware model in general.
It was recorded how participants modelled certain com-
ponents. The technique CPDFD would classify microphone,
loudspeaker, touch screen, and temperature sensor as element
Physical Link, for example. While almost all participants in
group GCPDFD modelled the microphone as Physical Link
(93%), the other group was divided. One quarter modelled
the microphone as Process, 17% as External Entity, and the
majority of 58% did not model it at all. For the loudspeaker, the
picture is almost the same: only one participant had modelled
it as Data Store instead of Process. While the majority of
GCPDFD also modelled the touch screen, the temperature sensor,
and the PCB, the share for GDFD was one third or less. The
battery was not modelled by anyone of GDFD, but by 86% of
GCPDFD. Likewise, the same was analysed for the interfaces
JTAG, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and USB. Almost all participants of
GCPDFD modelled these components as element Interface (86%,
93%, 86%, and 79%, respectively). In contrast, only 8% of
GDFD modelled JTAG, Bluetooth, and Wi-Fi and 25% modelled
the USB interface. Since the majority of GCPDFD modelled all
these components, while GDFD did not, this suggests an added
value of the two elements Physical Link and Interface.
Last, a brief review of the questionnaire. The only item
of interest in this study was about the simplicity of creating
a CPDFD/DFD. A total of 61.54% of GCPDFD agreed that
creating a DFD is easy, while 41.67% agreed of GDFD. This
seems to indicate that the two new elements of a CPDFD
have not increased the difficulty of a DFD, but actually made
it easier. However, this difference is not significant (Mann-
Whitney U test, U “ 13.5, p “ .911, p ą α). Therefore, the
difficulty of creating a CPDFD and DFD can be considered as
equal.
B. Survey and Interviews
This section presents the results of the survey and interviews
with device manufacturers and consulting companies. The
precise duration for conducting the study was not measured.
Participants indicated that they invested from two hours up
to two days. Most of them applied the TTM methodology
on their own devices. A few also carried out the analysis for
other devices, e.g., power inverter or smart home. Some people
used the results from previous assessments for a side-by-side
comparison.
a) Questionnaire: All participants agreed that it is worth
to create and analyse a hardware model (13 strongly agreed, 2
agreed) and no one disagreed that reusing the elements of a
DFD is the right technique for this (4 strongly agreed, 5 agreed,
3 indecisive). It was also asked about the added value of the
two new elements, resulting in exactly the same outcome. The
majority of 58.3% strongly agreed that both elements Physical
Link and Interface provided added value (17% agreed, 8%
each indecisive, disagreed, and strongly disagreed). They also
agreed (72.7%) that the elements contribute to a more accurate
modelling of IoT devices. Additional feedback was provided
noting that the two elements facilitate modelling, but that the
interface needs to be more integrated. It was also remarked that
the meaning of both elements is similar. The results suggest
that the hardware model, the Physical Link, and the Interface
improve the threat identification.
b) Interviews: This section summarises the findings of
the interview analysis. Statements by individual persons are
anonymised. If necessary, the person is described by categories
introduced in subsection V-B. In these cases, the role of the
persons and their company type are indicated in parentheses,
together with their participant number, e.g., (P1, security expert,
manufacturer).
When participants were asked about the relevance of a
hardware model, all agreed that this is an important part. Several
participants stated that the hardware model was the best part
of the TTM methodology. Hardware attacks are not considered
sufficiently and “without them one cannot find the crux of the
matter” (P8, security expert, manufacturer). One participant
had tried to represent hardware security in a model in the past
using the system modelling language. However, he said that
a structured threat analysis was not possible. In general, it
was seen as positive that one can quickly see how the device
is constructed and which interfaces and components, such as
Trusted Platform Modules (TPMs), it uses.
The extension of the DFD notation with the two elements
Physical Link and Interface was seen positive, but some
participants were not fully convinced. One participant found the
extension very good, as she “struggled in the past to map certain
hardware components in a well-distinguishable yet abstract
way” (P13, security expert, service provider). The Physical
Link was found to be good, as data is generated there and

actuators can influence the environment. “Even if a sensor is
analogue, that does not mean you don‘t have to think about
it” (P10, security expert, service provider). More feedback was
given for the Interface. It is useful and important, as “debug
interfaces are often overlooked” (P9, security expert, service
provider). In a certain way, one is also forced to think about
interfaces. However, a few participants noted that they did not
fully understand the difference between both elements. The
elements could also make the models more abstract and thus
more vague in certain cases. One participant noted that the
new elements are useful; their use is left to the user.
The feedback from the participants clearly shows that the
hardware model brings improvements and is important for the
threat analysis. Overall, the two new elements were also seen
positively and their enrichment appreciated.
VII. DISCUSSION
A. Hardware Model
In the experimental study, the median of group GCPDFD
identified 29.5 attack scenarios in the hardware model (59.1%
of all), GDFD found at least 11.5 scenarios (42.2%). The
efficiency was also higher for the hardware model (1 minute per
scenario) than for the average (2 and 4 minutes per scenario for
GCPDFD and GDFD respectively). In the survey, all participants,
security experts and engineers, agreed that it is worth to
create and analyse a hardware model (see subsection VI-B).
Furthermore, they reaffirmed the importance of the hardware
model in the interviews. One of the advantages they mentioned
was the quick overview of all components and interfaces. In
conclusion, the quantitative and qualitative results speak in
favour of a hardware model. This suggests that using a hardware
model may improve threat identification.
B. Physical Link and Interface
The two new elements Physical Link and Interface were
evaluated separately, but the jointly collected results differ only
slightly. Their results are therefore summarised together first
and then briefly discussed individually.
In the experimental study, the two groups GCPDFD and GDFD
had the single difference that the former had the two new
elements available in the diagram editor. However, GCPDFD
found significantly more scenarios than GDFD (49.9 and 27.3 on
average respectively) (see subsection VI-A). The assignment of
the scenarios to elements showed that GCPDFD also discovered
27.9 scenarios for the standard elements. The additional
scenarios were initiated by the Physical Link (10.9) and the
Interface (11.2). There was also a difference regarding privacy-
related threats. Group GCPDFD found on average 5.0 scenarios
while the GDFD found less than 1 scenario. The difference is
not statistically significant, but can be explained by the fact
that GCPDFD found 3.6 scenarios with the Physical Link and
1.2 scenarios with the Interface. This effect could also be
seen in the hardware model. The median found 29.5 and 11.5
scenarios for GCPDFD and GDFD, respectively. More than half
of the scenarios of the former were based on the Physical Link
(6) and Interface (10.5). It was also analysed how participants
modelled specific components. For example, almost all of
group GCPDFD modelled the microphone as Physical Link. In
contrast, only 42% of GDFD modelled it. They were indecisive
which element to use, as 3 participants modelled it as Process
and 2 as External Entity. The interfaces such as JTAG and
Bluetooth were modelled by about 90% of GCPDFD while these
were modelled by only one third or less of GDFD. This means
that the existence of the two new elements leads to such
components being modelled at all. The two elements do not
make the technique more difficult, as the questionnaire showed.
In the survey, the majority of 75% agreed that each Physical
Link and Interface provide added value and 73% agreed that
they contribute to more accurate modelling of IoT devices
(see subsection VI-B). In the interviews, the elements were
generally seen positive. One security expert confirmed the
problems with modelling certain hardware components without
the new elements. The Physical Link was said to be good as data
is generated there and actuators can influence the environment
and the Interface was conceived to be important as debug
interfaces are often overlooked, among others. However, it
was noted a few times that the differentiation between both
elements is not clear and that they could be summarised in one
element. In summary, there are many arguments in favour of
introducing the two new elements. The Physical Link leads to
several additional scenarios, as seen in the experimental study,
although not as many as for the Interface. The element can be
used to represent sensors, which in turn have mainly contributed
to the identification of threats against privacy. This added value
was also endorsed by the survey participants. The results thus
suggest that the Physical Link improves the threat identification.
The situation is similar for the Interface. Quantitatively, even
more scenarios could be identified with this element. The
importance of interfaces was highlighted by students as well as
security experts and engineers. Therefore, the results suggest
the Interface improves the threat identification as well.
C. Limitations
Some limitations must be taken into account in the reported
results. The HWD produced dozens of attack scenarios, but
several of them may also be found in DFDs, creating overlaps.
Consequently, the number of additional scenarios contributed by
the HWD is lower than the raw count suggests. The quantitative
effects of the two new elements must also be considered with
caution. In the experimental study, participants of GCPDFD had
predefined stencils for the Physical Link, e.g., microphone and
loudspeaker, and for the Interface, e.g., JTAG and Bluetooth.
The list of dozens of stencils had to be searched through first,
but these increase the likelihood that such components will
be modelled. The modelling then automatically led to further
scenarios. For a more detailed examination of the effects of
the two elements, further groups would have been necessary,
which would not have had predefined stencils available.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The many security incidents in the IoT highlight the ongoing
need for improved security. Although numerous researchers

address IoT security, systematic approaches are often lacking.
This work introduces a modelling technique tailored to IoT
devices to simplify modelling and enhance threat identification,
helping manufacturers address weaknesses early in the product
development cycle and support security by design. The pro-
posed CPDFD technique considers the special circumstances
of IoT devices. Due to their use in critical applications as well
as the high accessibility, the creation of a hardware model
was proposed. In addition, due to the interaction with the
environment and the high connectivity of IoT devices, the two
new elements Physical Link and Interface were introduced.
Across two studies, an experimental quantitative comparison
was conducted and the perspectives of security experts and
engineers were collected. In summary, all three changes of
the CPDFD technique indicate improvements compared to the
standard DFD. The technique enables more detailed modelling
of IoT devices, which in turn leads to more identified attack
scenarios, as the results demonstrated. This suggests that
CPDFDs improve the identification of threats. In the future,
the better integration of HWDs and DFDs will be addressed to
exploit synergy effects and improve the identification of attack
scenarios and countermeasures.