Taint-Style Vulnerability Detection and Confirmation for Node.js
Packages Using LLM Agent Reasoning
Ronghao Ni
ronghaon@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Mihai Christodorescu
christodorescu@google.com
Google
Limin Jia
liminjia@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
The rapidly evolving Node.js ecosystem currently includes mil-
lions of packages and is a critical part of modern software supply
chains, making vulnerability detection of Node.js packages increas-
ingly important. However, traditional program analysis struggles
in this setting because of dynamic JavaScript features and the large
number of package dependencies. Recent advances in large lan-
guage models (LLMs) and the emerging paradigm of LLM-based
agents offer an alternative to handcrafted program models. This
raises the question of whether an LLM-centric, tool-augmented
approach can effectively detect and confirm taint-style vulnerabil-
ities (e.g., arbitrary command injection) in Node.js packages. We
implement LLMVD.js, a multi-stage agent pipeline to scan code,
propose vulnerabilities, generate proof-of-concept exploits, and
validate them through lightweight execution oracles; and systemat-
ically evaluate its effectiveness in taint-style vulnerability detection
and confirmation in Node.js packages without dedicated static/-
dynamic analysis engines for path derivation. For packages from
public benchmarks, LLMVD.js confirms 84% of the vulnerabilities,
compared to less than 22% for prior program analysis tools. It also
outperforms a prior LLM–program-analysis hybrid approach while
requiring neither vulnerability annotations nor prior vulnerability
reports. When evaluated on a set of 260 recently released packages
(without vulnerability groundtruth information), traditional tools
produce validated exploits for few (≤2) packages, while LLMVD.js
generates validated exploits for 36 packages.
Keywords
Automatic Vulnerability Detection, Node.js, Large Language Mod-
els, ReAct Agents, LLM Agents, Exploit Generation, Vulnerability
Confirmation
1
Introduction
The Node.js ecosystem comprises millions of JavaScript packages
and is among the most widely used software platforms today. How-
ever, numerous studies have shown that a substantial fraction of
these packages contain security vulnerabilities [15, 58] and have
been exploited in software supply-chain attacks [30, 40]. To ensure
application security, it is critical to be able to identify vulnerabil-
ities within this ecosystem and in recent years researchers have
proposed tools to automatically detect and confirm vulnerabilities
in Node.js packages [9, 10, 28, 35]. These tools primarily target
taint-style vulnerabilities, including OS command injection, code
injection, prototype pollution, and path traversal. These tools use a
wide range of analysis techniques, such as dynamic taint analysis,
Preprint.
code-property-graph-based static analysis, symbolic execution, and
constraint-based synthesis.
While successful in uncovering many real-world vulnerabilities,
these tools share several fundamental challenges stemming from
inherent limitations of the underlying analysis techniques. First,
JavaScript’s highly dynamic nature makes accurate modeling of
language semantics difficult. The lack of precise type information
further complicates analysis. Second, Node.js native (built-in) func-
tions are implemented in C++, requiring either instrumentation of
the V8 engine or manually constructed abstractions. Third, these
tools rely on external JavaScript analysis infrastructure, such as
parsers [2], transpilers [1], and instrumentation tools [44]. These
dependencies are inherently brittle due to JavaScript’s complex lan-
guage features and evolving standards. Finally, many approaches
depend on satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solvers, which often
fail to handle constraints involving string operations and regular-
expression matching.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown strong performance
on coding-related tasks, including code generation and code com-
prehension [11]. Rather than relying on purpose-fit abstractions,
LLMs leverage extensive pre-trained knowledge and reasoning abil-
ities to comprehend complex code patterns and dynamic program
behaviors. Furthermore, LLM agents can iteratively refine their
outputs by incorporating feedback from previous unsuccessful at-
tempts. These capabilities suggest LLMs may be able to overcome
the limitations of traditional program analysis techniques.
This paper aims to answer the following question: Can an LLM-
centric, tool-augmented workflow effectively detect and confirm vul-
nerabilities in npm packages without dedicated static/dynamic anal-
ysis engines? To answer this question, we design and implement
LLMVD.js, a ReAct-based [54] agent that leverages large language
models to perform taint-style vulnerability detection and confirma-
tion for Node.js packages. We evaluate LLMVD.js on three datasets
(existing public benchmarks, one private benchmark, and a set of
recently released npm packages) and show that it confirms 84% of
public benchmark vulnerabilities with valid exploits, substantially
outperforming prior program-analysis tools and also outperform-
ing an LLM+program-analysis hybrid system [47] while requiring
significantly less prior information, and further discovers 36 vul-
nerabilities in recently released packages.
For the rest of this paper, we use rule-based program analysis to
refer to analysis techniques such as symbolic execution and taint
analysis that do not rely on machine learning components. We use
LLM-centric reasoning to refer to LLM-agent reasoning over raw
source code with lightweight tooling (e.g., search, execution, and
oracles), but without dedicated static/dynamic analysis engines for
taint/path derivation.
Our contributions are as follows:
1
arXiv:2604.20179v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

Ronghao Ni, Mihai Christodorescu, and Limin Jia
• A systematic evaluation of a multi-stage ReAct-style LLM
agent framework for taint-style vulnerability detection
and confirmation in Node.js packages, with direct com-
parison against state-of-the-art program-analysis tools and
a program-analysis–aided LLM approach.
• A multi-dataset evaluation setup for LLM-agent vulnerabil-
ity research: combining standard public benchmarks, trans-
formed benchmark variants for memorization robustness
checks, a private real-world dataset without CVEs/public
exploits, and recently released npm packages to assess gen-
eralizability under realistic settings.
• LLMVD.js identified 36 previously undocumented vulnera-
bilities in recently released Node.js packages.
Ethical Considerations Our work raises inherent dual-use con-
cerns due to LLMVD.js’s ability to automatically detect vulnerabili-
ties and generate exploits; however, we believe that the defensive
benefits outweigh the associated risks. All experiments were con-
ducted in sandboxed environments; no production systems or exter-
nal servers were targeted. We analyze only open-source packages.
We reported all 36 previously unreported validated vulnerabili-
ties identified in newly released packages to maintainers and have
received acknowledgments from 3 maintainers.
2
Background and Related Work
Vulnerability detection is the task of identifying security-relevant
flaws in software that may be exploited by adversaries [12, 31,
42, 43]. Vulnerability detection tools typically only report poten-
tial vulnerabilities and a separate confirmation step is needed to
remove false positives. To reduce the costly manual confirma-
tion effort, researchers have developed automated vulnerability
confirmation methods that synthesize proof-of-concept (PoC) ex-
ploits [5, 9, 10, 35]. We review most recent work on vulnerability
detection and confirmation of Node.js packages and applying LLMs
to vulnerability detection.
2.1
Node.js Vulnerability Detection and
Confirmation
Node.js Taint-style Vulnerability Detection. Recent vulnerability
detection tools for Node.js packages [9, 10, 28, 29, 35, 39] focus on
taint-style vulnerabilities, partly because they have easy to detect
code patterns and partly because they can lead to serious con-
sequences such as allowing attackers to inject arbitrary code or
execute arbitrary commands. For detection, these tools need to iden-
tify tainted paths from attacker controlled inputs to arguments of a
sink. In the case of command injection, code injection, and path tra-
versal, the sinks are known APIs such as exec, Function, File.Write. For
prototype pollution, the vulnerability pattern involves two tainted
paths and specific object field accesses.
To compare against LLM-centric agent reasoning without
dedicated static/dynamic analysis engines, we use FAST [28],
NodeMedic-FINE [9], and Explode.js [35] as representative exam-
ples of rule-based program analysis tools. FAST and Explode.js
use code-property-graph (CPG) based methods for detection. They
generate (their own custom) graphs representing information
such as dependency, object relationship, and key operations; then
Listing 1: Code snippet of a vulnerable API
1
const { exec } = require('child_process');
2
Arpping.prototype.ping = function(range) {
3
...
4
return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
5
range.forEach(ip => {
6
exec(`ping ${flag} ${this.timeout} ${ip}`, (
err, stdout, stderr) => {
7
...
8
});});});
9
}
Listing 2: PoC exploit
1
const Arpping = require('./index');
2
(async () => {
3
const a = new Arpping({ timeout: 1 });
4
const payload = ['127.0.0.1; touch /tmp/
os_cmd_success'];
5
await a.ping(payload);
6
})();
Figure 1: The vulnerable npm package arpping@2.0.0 (Snyk
ID: SNYK-JS-ARPPING-1060047).
vulnerability detection is reduced to a graph query. NodeMedic-
FINE on the other hand, instruments JavaScript at the source level
to implement dynamic taint tracking for vulnerability detection.
The current implementation of NodeMedic-FINE only detects
command injection and code injection vulnerabilities.
Vulnerability confirmation via exploit generation. To generate
PoC exploits, the tools need to generate a driver (testing harness)
that can trigger a call to the vulnerable API (sink) and find inputs
that can not only reach the sink, but also deliver the desired attack
payload (e.g., a command of attacker’s choice for command injection
vulnerabilities). For example, Listing 1 shows one vulnerable API in
the arpping package (Snyk ID: SNYK-JS-ARPPING-1060047). The
ping function constructs a command string using attacker-controlled
input range and passes it to the exec function, leading to an OS com-
mand injection vulnerability. To confirm this vulnerability, the tool
needs to generate a driver (Listing 2) that calls the ping function
with an input that injects an attacker-controlled command.
For inputs, FAST and Explode.js use symbolic execution to iden-
tify path constraints to reach the vulnerable API. NodeMedic-FINE
synthesizes input constraints from the taint provenance graph,
which is an output from the dynamic taint analysis and documents
all the operations that the tainted inputs underwent before reach-
ing the sink. Only Explode.js is capable of generating drivers that
can chain multiple API calls to reach the sink. It does so by query-
ing its custom code property graph to identify a linear call chain.
NodeMedic-FINE and FAST, instead, use a fix template to directly
call the vulnerable API. All tools rely on SMT solvers to resolve
constraints.
2

Taint-Style Vulnerability Detection and Confirmation for Node.js Packages Using LLM Agent Reasoning
2.2
LLMs in Software Vulnerability Detection
LLM-assisted Security Audit. Recent work has explored using
LLMs as assistants for security auditing, either as standalone vul-
nerability detectors or as components that augment traditional pro-
gram analysis workflows [26, 46, 52, 56]. Several studies systemati-
cally evaluate the capability of LLMs on vulnerability detection and
code analysis tasks. For example, Fang et al. analyze the strengths
and failure modes of LLMs for code reasoning in security-relevant
settings [19], while Lin et al. conduct a large-scale comparative eval-
uation of LLM configurations across multiple datasets and program-
ming languages [34]. Similar evaluation efforts further characterize
prompt sensitivity, model scale effects, and generalization limits in
vulnerability detection [37, 41]. LLMs have been increasingly inte-
grated into end-to-end auditing pipelines that combine detection,
testing, and repair. Prior work demonstrates LLM-guided fuzzing
and protocol testing, where models infer grammars and message se-
quences to improve coverage for stateful implementations [36, 49].
Other systems leverage LLMs to assist patch generation and auto-
mated repair under realistic constraints [18, 38].
LLMs have also been integrated into Node.js vulnerability anal-
ysis [24, 32, 33]. Most closely related to our work, PoCGen utilizes
LLMs alongside static and dynamic analyses to interpret vulner-
ability reports, draft candidate exploits, and iteratively validate
and refine them for npm vulnerabilities [47]. PoCGen relies on
CodeQL-based static taint analysis to identify candidate vulnerable
functions and input-to-sink paths, and employs dynamic analysis
by executing generated exploits in a sandboxed Node.js environ-
ment with vulnerability-specific runtime oracles to validate exploit
success and guide refinement. PoCGen demonstrates the effective-
ness of tightly integrating LLMs with program analysis and argues
that plain LLM-based agents are insufficient for this task [47]; in
contrast, we investigate whether a carefully designed LLM reason-
ing–only agent can achieve competitive performance. Accordingly,
we include PoCGen as a baseline in our evaluation.
LLM Agents in Security Auditing. A parallel line of work studies
LLMs as agents that can plan, use tools, and iteratively refine hy-
potheses, moving beyond single-pass vulnerability labeling toward
multi-step auditing [22, 25, 45, 57]. PentestGPT formalizes an LLM-
driven penetration-testing workflow with modular agent roles that
decompose high-level objectives into actionable testing steps and
tool interactions [16]. More broadly, recent studies demonstrate
that agentic LLM systems can exploit real-world known vulnerabili-
ties from vulnerability descriptions, highlighting both the potential
and the risks of autonomous offensive capability when paired with
tool use and structured memory [20]. However, to our knowledge,
no prior work has studied the performance and limitations of a
carefully designed LLM agent for end-to-end taint-style vulnerabil-
ity detection and confirmation in Node.js packages, which is the
focus of this paper.
3
Motivation
In this section, we discuss fundamental challenges that rule-based
program analysis tools face when detecting and confirming taint-
style vulnerabilities in Node.js packages and outline why the capa-
bilities of LLMs in a ReAct-based agent design framework suit this
task.
Table 1: Limitations of three representative program-
analysis-based tools for Node.js taint-style vulnerability de-
tection and confirmation: FAST [28], NodeMedic-FINE [9],
Explode.js [35]
Challenges
Why challenging
C1 Generating dri-
vers for PoC
Drivers may include complex interactions that
make multiple API calls, set up global environ-
ment correctly, and construct and invoke call-
backs.
Tools
FAST
Does not generate drivers.
Limits
NodeMedic-
FINE
Uses fixed driver templates and cannot handle
complex interactions.
Explode.js
Supports only linear call chains
C2 Hard to analyze
code units
Imported dependencies significantly increase the
complexity of the analysis. Native operations are
managed internally by the JavaScript engine and
therefore need delicate custom handling.
Tools
FAST
Needed manual modeling of native functions.
Current implementation is missing significant
(> 90%) support.
Limits
NodeMedic-
FINE
Applies over-approximated tainting policy.
Explode.js
Needs manually crafted symbolic summaries for
imported APIs, resulting in low detection rate
in Node.js packages in the wild.
C3 Lacking
type
info.
Analysis needs arguments of the correct type and
object structure.
Tools
FAST
Ignore types
Limits
NodeMedic-
FINE
Algorithms for reconstructing types, neither
sound nor complete
Explode.js
Querying the CPG to reconstruct types, neither
sound nor complete
C4 Reliant
on
other JavaScript
analysis infras-
tructure
Analysis tools need another set of complex tools
such as parsers, transpilers, and instrumentation
tools, to implement their custom analysis. These
tools are brittle due to JavaScript’s standard evo-
lutions and complex features.
Tools
FAST
Esprima [2] parsing errors and call-edge issues.
Limits
NodeMedic-
FINE
Jalangi2’s [44] lack of support for ES6+
Explode.js
Graph.js [21] exits with errors for many pack-
ages.
C5 Reliant on SMT
The analysis generates constraints on string op-
erations and regular expression matching, which
are difficult to handle for SMT solvers and is an
active area of research.
Tools
FAST
Z3 [14] timeout when solving path constraints.
Limits
NodeMedic-
FINE
SMT solver timeout when solving constraints
on input.
Explode.js
SMT solver timeout when solving path and in-
put constraints.
3.1
Challenges in Rule-based Program Analysis
Recall from Section 2.1 state-of-the-art rule-based tools [9, 28, 35]
implement dynamic taint tracking and code-property-graph-based
static analysis for detection; and leverages symbolic execution and
3

Ronghao Ni, Mihai Christodorescu, and Limin Jia
constraint-based synthesis for generating inputs for PoCs. Some
use [35] CPG-based static analysis for generating drivers that in-
clude complex code patterns (i.e., not directly call the vulnerable
API). Despite substantial improvements, these tools continue to face
challenges arising from the highly dynamic nature of JavaScript, the
ongoing evolution of the JavaScript language, large and complex
dependencies, and their reliance on other sophisticated analysis
infrastructures. These challenges are common across existing tools
and stem from the fundamental limitations of the underlying tech-
niques, rather than from limitations of individual implementation
choices. We summarize these challenges in Table 1 and explain how
each tool partially addresses them. In practice, these limitations
often lead to missed vulnerabilities or failures in exploit confir-
mation. Although these tools will continue to improve, as long as
the same core techniques are employed, progress is likely to be
incremental [7, 8]. Alternatively, tools may be increasingly special-
ized, exploring different trade-off spaces to achieve high efficiency
for specific vulnerability classes or to target different application
domains (e.g., Mini apps [48, 55], React web apps [23], and Electron
apps [4, 27]).
3.2
Advantages of LLM Agents
Reasoning beyond handcrafted program models. As summarized
in Table 1, many challenges faced by rule-based tools are from the
need to construct and maintain accurate program models, which
is often at odds with scalability and requires substantial manual
effort and domain expertise. Moreover, there is a steep increase
in the effort required for improving the analysis to cover addi-
tional features, once core behaviors have been modeled. In contrast,
learning-based approaches, especially large language models in
the current era, provide a promising alternative by utilizing their
extensive pre-trained knowledge and reasoning abilities to compre-
hend complex code patterns, library usages, and dynamic behaviors
without requiring exhaustive manual modeling. As a result, they
can adapt more readily to evolving programming practices and soft-
ware ecosystems, where manually maintaining precise program
models becomes increasingly impractical.
Oracle-Guided Iterative Reasoning. Another important factor that
makes LLM agents well-suited for taint-style vulnerability detection
and confirmation tasks in Node.js packages is that LLM agents can
iteratively refine their answers based on feedback from previous
unsuccessful attempts. In contrast, traditional program-analysis
techniques typically perform one-shot reasoning over a fixed pro-
gram representation. While iterative counter-example guided ab-
straction refinement (CEGAR) methods [13] have been applied to
domains such as model checking, custom algorithm design and
significant engineering effort is needed for a specific tool to benefit
from CEGAR. Moreover, it is easy to design and implement a test-
ing oracle for taint-style vulnerabilities by observing side effects,
commonly used in previous work [9, 28, 35]. LLM agents can then
generate candidate inputs, execute them against the target package,
and refine their reasoning based on observed outcomes.
Favorable code size distribution in the npm ecosystem. Despite
the strong reasoning capabilities of large language models, current
LLMs remain constrained by finite context window sizes, which
102
103
104
105
106
Token Count (log scale)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
90% = 32,448
25%
50%
75%
90%
Code Injection
OS Command Injection
Path Traversal
Prototype Pollution
Total (All Types)
(a) SecBench.js & VulcaN datasets
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
Token Count (log scale)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative Probability
90% = 147,025
25%
50%
75%
90%
All Packages
Total (All Types)
(b) Recently crawled npm packages (17,151 pack-
ages)
Figure 2: Cumulative distribution function (CDF) of token
counts using the gpt-5-mini tokenizer. Blue dashed lines
mark the 90th percentile for the combined datasets: 32,448
tokens for SecBench.js & VulcaN and 147,025 tokens for re-
cently crawled npm packages. Only JavaScript files (with ex-
tensions .js, .jsx, .mjs, and .cjs) are included in the count. We
exclude TypeScript files because most published npm pack-
ages distribute transpiled JavaScript artifacts for execution,
and our analysis focuses on code that is directly executed in
production.
limit the amount of code that can be processed effectively in a single
pass [11, 17, 51]. However, when considering the natural distribu-
tion of real-world npm packages, we observe that in widely used
benchmarks and empirical datasets, most npm packages are suffi-
ciently small that they do not stress the context limits of modern
LLMs. For instance, as shown in Figure 2, the majority of packages
in the VulcaN and SecBench.js datasets contain relatively small
amounts of code, with 90th percentile token counts below 32,449.
Similarly, in the recently crawled npm packages (which will be
discussed in Section 5.1.1), the cumulative distribution over token
counts exhibits a comparable trend, where 90th percentile token
counts are below 147,026. This measures the total sizes of the code-
base, but in reality, an LLM agent will not load the entire codebase
into its context window since it can focus on specific files and
functions relevant to the vulnerability detection task. However,
even considering this, the 90th percentile token counts are still well
within the context window sizes of recent LLM models, such as
4

Taint-Style Vulnerability Detection and Confirmation for Node.js Packages Using LLM Agent Reasoning
<package>@<version>
Finder
Environment 
Setup
Judge
Judge
Judge
Constraints
Constraints 
Inferencer
Testing Oracles
Exploit
Exploiter
Rule-based Program
LLM Agent
Per-finding validation
Iterative exploit attempts
LLM Agents
{ 
 "vuln_type": "prototype_pollution", 
 "location": { "file": "utils.js", "line": 34 }, 
 "description": "User input is merged into an 
object without filtering special keys, allowing 
prototype pollution.", 
 "evidence": "Object.assign({}, defaults, 
userInput)" 
}
{ 
 "vuln_type": "path_traversal", 
 "location": { "file": "server.js", "line": 87 }, 
 "description": "User-controlled path is 
joined with the base directory without 
validation.", 
 "evidence": "fs.readFile(path.join(root, 
req.url))" 
}
{ 
 "vuln_type": "os_command_injection", 
 "location": { "file": "index.js", "line": 12 }, 
 "description": "User input is concatenated 
into a shell command.", 
 "evidence": "exec(\"ls \" + name)" 
}
Findings
{ 
 "finding": { 
 "vuln_type": "path_traversal", 
 "location": { "file": "server.js", "line": 87 }, 
 "description": "User-controlled path is 
joined with the base directory without 
validation.", 
 "evidence": "fs.readFile(path.join(root, 
req.url))" 
 }, 
 "constraint": "Payload must include ../ 
{ 
 "finding": { 
 "vuln_type": "os_command_injection", 
 "location": { "file": "index.js", "line": 12 }, 
 "description": "User input is concatenated 
into a shell command.", 
 "evidence": "exec(\"ls \" + name)" 
 }, 
 "constraint": "Payload must be a valid 
filename and …” 
} 
Constraints
{ 
 "findings": [ { ... } ], 
 "verdicts": [ { ... } ], 
 "constraints": [ { ... } ], 
 "exploits": [ 
 { 
 "finding": { … } }, 
 "all_runs": [ 
 { "code": "const { exec } = require(…); …”, 
"exit_code": 0 } 
 ], 
 "success": true, 
 "successful_run": { 
 "code": "const { exec } = require(…); …”, 
 "exit_code": 0 
 } 
 } 
 ], 
} 
Final Report
Figure 3: Overview of LLMVD.js.
OpenAI’s GPT-5 series (400K), Gemini-3 series (1M), and Claude
Sonnet 4.5 (200K by default, 1M experimental).
This does not imply that large or complex packages are unim-
portant; rather, it reflects the natural size distribution of the npm
ecosystem, where most packages are relatively small. As a result,
LLM-based approaches are well suited for reasoning about a sub-
stantial fraction of real-world packages. Even when packages are
larger, an LLM agent can iteratively construct task-relevant context
through pattern-based search and package-structure understand-
ing, without requiring dedicated static/dynamic analysis engines
for taint/path derivation.
4
LLMVD.js Design and Implementation
In this section, we present the design and implementation details of
our proposed multi-stage LLM-based agent framework for detecting
and confirming vulnerabilities in Node.js packages.
4.1
System Overview
Figure 3 illustrates the architecture of LLMVD.js, a multi-stage
framework for vulnerability detection and exploit confirmation
in Node.js packages. In practice, end-to-end vulnerability confir-
mation requires reasoning about candidate locations, construct-
ing executable drivers, and validating exploitability with reliable,
automated signals. To make this process tractable and auditable,
LLMVD.js decomposes the pipeline into a small number of stages
with distinct objectives: the initial finding stage prioritizes high
recall, aiming to identify as many potentially vulnerable locations
as possible, while the subsequent stages focus on precision by vali-
dating exploitability and eliminating false positives. Accordingly,
LLMVD.js organizes analysis as a staged workflow in which candi-
date findings are first enumerated, then filtered for exploitability,
then augmented with exploitation conditions, and finally validated
through execution-based verification. The final stage uses auto-
mated execution oracles that determine success based on concrete
side effects.
4.2
Target Resolution and Execution Context
The pipeline accepts either a local project path or an npm identi-
fier in package@version format and operates on a fixed snapshot
of the target package. We support four taint-style vulnerability
classes that are commonly supported by prior program analysis
tools, including command injection, code injection, path traversal,
and prototype pollution. Each class is registered with (i) a natural
language vulnerability specification, (ii) goal-oriented exploitation
criteria, and (iii) a class-specific execution oracle. Success is deter-
mined by vulnerability-class–specific side effects. These uniform
success predicates enable automated validation across heteroge-
neous vulnerability types.
4.3
Multi-Stage Vulnerability Reasoning
Pipeline
Candidate Enumeration (Finder). The Finder stage performs
hypothesis generation by enumerating candidate vulnerabilities
through lightweight codebase exploration, including directory tra-
versal, pattern-based search, and source inspection. Each candidate
is summarized as a structured hypothesis consisting of a vulner-
ability type, precise source location, supporting code evidence,
and a set of potentially reachable APIs. This stage intentionally
favors over-approximation and prioritizes coverage over precision
through prompt design, deferring exploitability assessment and
confirmation to subsequent refinement stages. Each candidate
is then processed independently through the remainder of the
pipeline.
Exploitability Filtering (Judge). The Judge stage filters infeasi-
ble hypotheses through focused code inspection and lightweight
data-flow reasoning, primarily as a reachability check without solv-
ing path constraints. Exported APIs are conservatively treated as
externally reachable to avoid prematurely discarding viable attack
surfaces. For each candidate, the stage produces a structured verdict
consisting of a binary exploitability label and a concise justification.
5

Ronghao Ni, Mihai Christodorescu, and Limin Jia
Only candidate findings deemed potentially exploitable proceed to
constraint inference, thereby eliminating false positives early and
reducing unnecessary exploration in later stages.
Constraint Inference (Constraints Inferencer). Given a validated
hypothesis, the Constraints Inferencer stage derives a compact set
of actionable exploitation conditions, including likely entry points,
required parameters, payload structure, and relevant bypass con-
siderations. These constraints summarize the minimal conditions
necessary to propagate attacker-controlled input to the vulnera-
ble sink and serve as an explicit interface between exploitability
reasoning and exploit synthesis.
By representing exploitation conditions explicitly as structured
constraints, this stage provides a clear, structured interface for
subsequent exploit synthesis.
Execution-Coupled Exploit Synthesis (Exploiter). The Exploiter
stage performs execution-coupled synthesis by generating exploits
that instantiate the inferred constraints and executing them within
the target package environment. Each attempt imports the vul-
nerable module, executes the payload under Node.js, and records
structured results together with full stdout and stderr traces. Exploit
attempts are bounded by iteration limits, and all failed attempts are
retained for post hoc analysis. Successful executions are immedi-
ately validated by the class-specific oracle (discussed in Section 4.4)
to provide confirmation of exploitability.
4.4
Oracle-Guided Execution and Automatic
Probing
A central design choice in LLMVD.js is the use of oracle-guided
exploit confirmation to avoid reliance on model self-reporting and
manual inspection. For each vulnerability class, we define an ex-
ecution oracle that evaluates concrete side effects produced by
exploit attempts. The execution harness augments each payload
with vulnerability-specific probing logic. For example, code injec-
tion exploits must trigger a predefined marker function; prototype
pollution exploits are validated by probing polluted object prop-
erties; and path traversal exploits must read and print a prepared
sentinel file. For OS command injection, sentinel artifacts are re-
moved before each attempt to prevent contamination across runs.
These class-specific probes provide uniform, automated success
predicates and enable execution-driven refinement of exploit hy-
potheses without explicit symbolic constraint solving.
4.5
Tooling and Coordination Infrastructure
We organize the supporting toolset into three categories aligned
with the stages of vulnerability reasoning. First, exploration and
inspection tools enable rapid understanding of package structure
and relevant logic through directory navigation, source reading,
and pattern-based search. These tools are shared across all reason-
ing stages. Second, execution and environment interaction tools
are restricted to the exploit synthesis stage and provide controlled
Node.js and shell execution, vulnerability-specific harness integra-
tion, auxiliary side-effect checks, and optional background process
management for long-running services such as web server appli-
cations. Finally, structured reporting and coordination utilities en-
force typed submissions for hypotheses, verdicts, constraints, and
exploit results, enabling stage-level auditing, failure attribution,
and systematic analysis of intermediate reasoning behavior.
4.6
Implementation
Each conceptual stage described above is implemented as a dedi-
cated LLM agent. Each agent operates with an isolated context and
is responsible for a specific task within the pipeline.
LLM Model Selection. Since our evaluation involves vulnerability
detection and confirmation on unrevealed or unpublished vulnera-
bilities, we use APIs that have a non-training policy to minimize
the risk of data leakage and the possibility of further training LLMs
on unrevealed vulnerabilities. To balance performance and cost,
we select OpenAI’s GPT-5-mini model (gpt-5-mini-2025-08-07)
as our LLM backbone. The model is accessed via OpenAI’s API
platform.
Agent Framework. We implement our multi-stage agent frame-
work based on LangChain1, a popular framework for developing
LLM-powered applications. LangChain provides modular compo-
nents for building complex agent workflows. We use a recursion
limit of 54 for the agents to prevent infinite or excessive loops
during tool usage. Considering the non-determinism of LLMVD.js,
we allow up to three attempts when no successful exploit is gener-
ated. Here, success is defined as observable side effects detected by
automated oracles, but not by manual verification.
We adopt a custom multi-stage architecture rather than ex-
isting open-source frameworks such as OpenHands [50] and
SWE-agent [53], to provide explicit stage separation, enabling fine-
grained auditing, debugging, and the integration of domain-specific
verification components. While these frameworks are effective
for general software engineering tasks, they lack native support
for stage-level logging and interfaces for vulnerability validation,
exploit execution, and oracle-based verification required for our
analysis. LLMVD.js enables our study of LLM agent behavior for
npm vulnerability detection and exploit generation in a transparent
and controllable environment.
Prompt Design. We create custom prompts for each agent stage
to guide the LLM’s reasoning and tool usage. The prompts include
clear instructions, the exploitation goal, and an output structure
formatted in JSON that contains the expected information for each
stage. We refine the prompts iteratively based on initial experiments
to improve agent performance, while ensuring no information leak-
age related to the evaluated packages. Full prompt templates are
provided in Appendix C.
5
Evaluation
We evaluate LLMVD.js on a variety of datasets to answer the fol-
lowing research questions:
• RQ1: How effective is LLMVD.js in detecting and confirming
vulnerabilities in Node.js packages?
• RQ2: What is the cost of using LLMVD.js?
• RQ3: What are the limitations and failure modes of LLMVD.js,
and how can they inform future improvements?
1https://python.langchain.com/en/latest/index.html
6

Taint-Style Vulnerability Detection and Confirmation for Node.js Packages Using LLM Agent Reasoning
Table 2: Overview of the VulcaN, SecBench.js, NodeMedic, and the newly crawled Wild datasets. “Raw” refers to the initial
number of vulnerable instances per dataset as used in previous work (VulcaN and SecBench.js) or as received (NodeMedic and
Wild). “Valid” denotes packages still available on the npm registry at collection time. “Used” is the sampled subset. “Total” is
the count of valid packages and sampled packages. “Dist. (%)” indicates the distribution of each vulnerability type across the
combined datasets.
Vulnerability Type
CWE
VulcaN
SecBench.js
NodeMedic
Wild
Total
Dist. (%)
Raw
Valid
Raw
Valid
Raw
Used
Raw
Used
Path Traversal
CWE-22
5
3
161
156
0
0
91
65
224
21.62%
Command Injection
CWE-78
66
58
82
78
1,022
130
1,004
65
331
31.95%
Code Injection
CWE-94
22
21
21
21
228
129
452
65
236
22.78%
Prototype Pollution
CWE-1321
67
62
120
118
0
0
104
65
245
23.65%
Total
160
144
384
373
1,250
259
1,651
260
1,036
100.00%
5.1
Experiment Setup
5.1.1
Datasets. Our evaluation utilizes four types of datasets: 1)
public benchmarks commonly used in vulnerability detection re-
search, 2) a private dataset of real-world Node.js packages with
known vulnerable data paths but no associated CVEs or public
exploits, 3) a transformed dataset derived from public benchmarks
to assess generalizability, and 4) a crawled dataset of recently re-
leased Node.js packages from the npm registry to further evaluate
performance on unseen data.
Public benchmarks. Following common practice, we use
two widely recognized public benchmarks: VulcaN [7] and
SecBench.js [6]. These datasets collected vulnerable Node.js
packages from the npm registry based on reports from GitHub
Advisory, Snyk, Huntr.dev, and the CVE database. For a fair com-
parison with past work, we select four vulnerability types that have
been studied previously: path traversal (CWE-22), OS command
injection (CWE-78), code injection (CWE-94), and prototype pollu-
tion (CWE-1321). We use the same set of packages evaluated in the
most recent prior work (Explode.js [35]), excluding packages that
are no longer available on the npm registry.
Private dataset. We obtained access to the NodeMedic-FINE pri-
vate dataset [9], which contains real-world Node.js packages with
vulnerable data paths but without associated CVEs or public ex-
ploits. Although all packages contain vulnerable code paths, no
CVEs or other security advisories have been assigned for reasons
like low download count or the developers’ assumption that the
parent package should sanitize the input before calling the vulnera-
ble API. This dataset can only be used to evaluate our framework on
code injection and OS command injection vulnerabilities, the only
types supported by NodeMedic-FINE. Considering cost and time
constraints, we randomly sample 129 packages with code-injection
vulnerabilities and 130 with command-injection vulnerabilities for
evaluation. These sample sizes were chosen based on the average
number of vulnerable instances per vulnerability type in the VulcaN
and SecBench.js datasets after filtering. This dataset is especially
useful for assessing our framework’s capability to identify vulner-
abilities that are not publicly documented, thus creating a more
realistic scenario for vulnerability detection, particularly regarding
the issues of LLMs memorizing codes and exploits instead of en-
gaging in genuine reasoning. In this work, we refer to this dataset
as NodeMedic.
Transformed dataset. Since the public benchmarks used in this
work were released before the knowledge cutoff date of the LLM we
chose (GPT-5-mini: May 31, 2024), there is a risk that memorization
in the LLM affects the performance and thus it is crucial to evaluate
how well our framework generalizes to unseen data. To achieve this,
we create a transformed dataset by selecting up to 20 vulnerable
instances per CWE from each public dataset, and applying code
transformations such as renaming variables and functions, remov-
ing comments, and changing formatting. Package names, versions,
and links in manifest files are also anonymized. The aim is to gen-
erate code that maintains the original semantics and vulnerabilities
while being sufficiently different from the LLMs’ training data, thus
reducing the chances of memorization. For transforming JavaScript
code, we use terser [3], a toolkit for mangling and compressing
JavaScript.
Crawled dataset. To further evaluate our framework on unseen
data, we crawled recently released Node.js packages from the npm
registry that were published in December 2025. We consider only
newly released or updated packages and collected 17,151 packages
during this period. We designed regular expressions to identify
potential vulnerable code patterns. The full regex set is provided in