Self-Supervised Learning for Android Malware
Detection on a Time-Stamped Dataset
Annan Fu
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Vancouver, Canada
fu.anna@northeastern.edu
Hao Pei
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Vancouver, Canada
pei.h@northeastern.edu
Maryam Tanha
Khoury College of Computer Sciences
Northeastern University
Vancouver, Canada
m.tanha@northeastern.edu
Abstract—Android malware detectors built with machine
learning often suffer from temporal bias: models are trained
and evaluated without respecting apps’ actual release times,
inﬂating accuracy and weakening real-world robustness. We
address this by constructing a time-stamped dataset of benign and
malicious Android apps and introducing a timestamp-veriﬁcation
procedure to ensure temporal accuracy. We then propose a
detection framework that uses Bootstrap Your Own Latent
(BYOL) for self-supervised pre-training to learn obfuscation-
resilient representations, followed by supervised classiﬁcation.
Under time-aware evaluation, the method attains 98% accuracy
and 89% F1. We further characterize malware behavior by
analyzing true positives and false negatives using VirusTotal and
the MITRE ATT&CK framework. To support reproducibility
and further innovation, we release our dataset and source code.
Index Terms—Android, malware, self-supervised learning,
temporal bias
I. INTRODUCTION
Machine learning (ML) has been widely used for Android
malware detection; however, such models face critical chal-
lenges. First, concept drift, i.e., distribution shifts over time
from evolving malware families, benign apps, or platform fea-
tures—can cause models trained on historical data to degrade,
a phenomenon known as model aging. The second issue is
temporal bias (also called temporal inconsistency) that stems
from not considering chronological order for train/test splits
during evaluation. This can lead to over-optimistic results that
fail to reﬂect real-world scenarios [1] [2] [3]. To properly
address both concept drift and temporal bias in Android
malware detection, we should have a reliable timestamp for
each app [4]. However, ﬁnding a guaranteed ground-truth
timestamp is challenging. This is due to the fact that such
metadata (e.g., compilation time) can be easily modiﬁed, either
intentionally by attackers or because of development mistakes
or even may not be available for all apps (e.g., uploadDate
from AndroZoo [5]).
Furthermore, Android malware data has a few practical
problems: the labels are not always reliable (heuristic Virus-
Total [6] votes, malware shows different behavior at run-time
vs. static analysis), many benign and malicious apps look
similar in their API calls, permissions, or opcodes (so, it is
The authors would like to thank Mastercard Canada for supporting this
research.
hard to pick clear “opposites” for contrastive learning), and
the data shifts over time because malware evolves and uses
obfuscation. As a result, fully supervised models can overﬁt
to inaccurate labels, and contrastive methods assume clear
semantic separation between classes, which breaks down when
there is high feature overlap or when “hard negative samples”
(similar-but-different samples) dominate.
Considering the aforementioned issues, in this paper, we
ﬁrst create a time-stamped dataset of Android goodware
and malware as well as proposing a timestamp veriﬁcation
method using the API call introduction time. Moreover, we
adopt Bootstrap Your Own Latent (BYOL) [7] as a self-
supervised pre-training framework to enhance feature repre-
sentations before supervised classiﬁcation. BYOL leverages
all data, regardless of label quality, to learn generalized and
behaviorally meaningful representations. Unlike contrastive
methods, BYOL does not require explicit negative pairs, avoid-
ing instability caused by overlapping API calls or permission
patterns between apps. Overall, BYOL learns obfuscation-
resilient and behaviorally consistent embeddings from unla-
beled features that improve robustness to unseen malware and
mitigate concept drift.
This paper makes the following key contributions:
• Creating a time-stamped dataset: We have created a
time-stamped dataset of Android benign applications and
malware samples. This time-based dataset helps tackle the
temporal bias in ML-based Android malware detectors.
Additionally, since app time-related metadata may not
reliably reﬂect its release date, we introduce a timestamp
veriﬁcation method to improve temporal accuracy.
• Using self-supervised learning: To the best of our
knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to employ the BYOL self-
supervised learning framework to enhance the ability of
Android malware detectors to identify new or obfuscated
malicious apps.
• Open Science: We have made our dataset and code
publicly available on GitHub repository1 to facilitate
reproducibility and further research in Android malware
detection.
1https://github.com/maryam-tanha/Self-supervised-Learning-for-Android-
Malware-Detection
arXiv:2604.23025v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides a review of existing studies on addressing temporal
bias as well as the works on self-supervised learning for
Android malware detection. Our methodology, including the
creation of our time-stamped dataset, timestamp veriﬁcation
process, and malware detection using BYOL and logistic
regression (LR) is discussed in Section III. The performance
evaluation of our proposed system and analysis of the results
are included in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
We reviewed existing studies on Android malware detection
with respect to the following aspects.
1) Concept drift and temporal bias: TESSERACT [3]
is an open-source evaluation framework designed to
eliminate spatial and temporal experimental bias in ML-
based Android malware detection. DroidEvolver [8]
mitigates concept drift without full retraining or true
labels by using lightweight online updates with evolving
feature set and pseudo labels. It ﬂags drifting apps
via a Juvenilization Indicator. APIGraph [9] captures
semantic similarity between APIs and improves state-
of-the-art classiﬁers so that they can still detect evolved
malware. KronoDroid [2] is a hybrid-featured Android
dataset (a combination of static and dynamic features)
and provides timestamps for the apps to facilitate the
detection and characterization of the evolution of An-
droid malware (concept drift). Explainable AI (XAI)
methods are employed in [10] to investigate the over-
optimistic performance of Android malware classiﬁers.
It shows that such high performance is due to the fact
that ML models learn to distinguish apps based on tem-
poral differences rather than actual malicious behaviors.
Debiasing algorithms are proposed in [11] to be applied
to data sets to ensure that they are representative of
the population at the time of the experiment, mitigating
both concept drift and temporal bias. A practical way
to handle concept drift is classiﬁcation with rejection,
i.e., quarantine samples likely to be misclassiﬁed for
expert review. This idea is used in [12] by introduc-
ing a framework called TRANSCENDENT (built on
Transcend [13]). The authors show that their proposed
framework outperforms state-of-the-art baselines and
generalizes across malware classiﬁers. To properly ad-
dress both temporal bias and concept drift, we should
assign a timestamp to each app that reﬂects its release
time to the market. In the existing studies, two main
approaches are utilized as follows:
• Internal Timestamps (extracted from the appli-
cation package(APK) File): Internal timestamps
are metadata extracted directly from the application
package or the ﬁles it contains. These are often
manipulable by attackers or developers [14] [2]. The
ﬁrst timestamp in this category is compilation date
(or DEX date) that approximates the assembly time
by checking the last-modiﬁed time of the main DEX
ﬁle. However, it is now considered unusable because
recent apps frequently provide an invalid value, such
as 1980 [4]. Other timestamps are Last Modiﬁcation
and Earliest Modiﬁcation. The former is the latest
modiﬁcation timestamp found in any of the inner
ﬁles that compose the application while the latter is
the earliest modiﬁcation timestamp found in any of
the inner ﬁles of the application [2].
• External Timestamps (extracted from VirusTo-
tal/Online Sources): External timestamps are de-
rived from sources outside the control of the appli-
cation developers/attackers, making them generally
more robust against tampering. The most common
one is First Seen VT (VirusTotal Submission) [1].
However, this timestamp does not necessarily re-
ﬂect the app release time to the market. One of
the recent studies [4] leveraged the Google Play
Store uploadDate metadata from AndroZoo [5] as
a precise indicator of an app’s release time. By
relying on this timestamp, the authors created a
temporally-consistent dataset. However, uploadDate
is not available for all the apps from AndroZoo
(only available for the apps from Google Play
market).
While we used the second approach to assign times-
tamps to the apps in our dataset, we have proposed a
veriﬁcation algorithm for the assigned timestamps.
2) Self-supervised learning: The use of self-supervised
learning has shown promises in improving the perfor-
mance of Android malware detectors [15]–[17]. One of
the key studies is [15] which addresses concept drift by
combining active learning with a hierarchical contrastive
encoder and a new pseudo-loss uncertainty score for
sample selection. This approach maintains more stable
accuracy over several years and reduces analyst labeling
efforts. IFDroid [16], is a framework that enhances
Android malware family classiﬁcation using contrastive
learning and function call graph (FCG) analysis. The
FCGs of the apps are converted into images. Then,
contrasive learning is performed on these images. This
framework achieves robust, obfuscation-resilient, and
interpretable Android malware classiﬁcation. Comple-
mentary to this line of work, our approach lever-
ages BYOL, a non-contrastive self-supervised method
that learns without requiring negative samples, to ex-
tract obfuscation-resilient representations from unla-
beled data. SHERLOCK [17] is a self-supervised deep
learning framework for malware detection built upon
the Vision Transformer architecture. It adopts an image-
based binary representation of executables to automati-
cally learn distinctive features that distinguish malicious
programs from benign ones. The performance evaluation
of SHERLOCK shows its effectiveness in binary and
multi-class Android malware classiﬁcation.

III. METHODOLOGY
Our methodology follows a systematic workﬂow as shown
in Figure 1.
A. Time-Based Dataset Construction and Organization
Our dataset construction addresses temporal inconsistency
by ensuring chronological integrity between training and test
data. We created a dataset of 40,000 Android applications
spanning the year 2021 to 2024, maintaining a realistic 9:1
ratio of benign to malware samples to reﬂect real-world
distributions.
1) Temporal Splitting Strategy: To mitigate temporal bias,
our methodology implements a chronological splitting strat-
egy. The splitting approach ensures that all test samples
represent future time periods relative to training samples.
The test set comprises 4,000 samples (400 malware and
3,600 benign) exclusively from 2024, representing the most
recent applications in our dataset. The training set contains
36,000 (3,600 malware and 32,400 benign) samples from
applications time-stamped between 2021 and 2024. This tem-
poral arrangement guarantees that all training data precedes
test data chronologically, eliminating the possibility of training
on “future” information.
2) Dataset Collection: We collected benign APKs exclu-
sively from AndroZoo using vt detection = 0 and market from
GooglePlay as ﬁlters. Timestamps were obtained from Andro-
Zoo’s uploadDate metadata as a reliable timestamp for chrono-
logical ordering [4]. We initially collected malware from
AndroZoo using vt detection ≥15 as the primary identiﬁcation
criterion [15]. For samples lacking uploadDate information,
we utilized VirusTotal’s ﬁrst submission date metadata as
the timestamp. Due to limited recent malware samples, we
supplemented our dataset with malware samples from Mal-
wareBazaar [18], utilizing VirusTotal’s ﬁrst submission date
metadata as timestamps. To ensure consistency, all malware
samples selected from MalwareBazaar were required to have
a VirusTotal detection count of at least 15. Table I presents
the detailed distribution of our time-stamped dataset.
TABLE I
DATASET DISTRIBUTION
Year
Benign
Malware
Malware
Total
(uploadDate)
(uploadDate)
(ﬁrst submission date)
2024
9,000
17
383
9,400
2023
9,000
97
114
9,211
2022
9,000
248
767
10,015
2021
9,000
426
1,948
11,374
Total
36,000
788
3,212
40,000
3) Timestamp Veriﬁcation: Although the uploadDate pro-
vided by Google (and available via AndroZoo) serves as a
good indicator of an app’s market release time, it is not
always available. Similarly, the ﬁrst submission time reported
by VirusTotal does not necessarily reﬂect the actual release
date of an app. Therefore, we developed a timestamp ver-
iﬁcation process to address this limitation. Building upon
the methodology of [14], we developed a systematic API
call-based veriﬁcation method applied to all 40,000 samples.
We ﬁrst extracted API calls used by each app using static
analysis (Androguard tool [19]). We then estimated each app’s
market release time (a lower bound) by taking the most recent
introduction timestamp among its API calls and compared it
with uploadDate from AndroZoo and ﬁrst submission date
from VirusTotal. The detailed procedure is described below.
Our primary data source for API call timestamp analysis
consists of API call ﬁrst introduction timestamps systemati-
cally extracted from the AOSP Git Repository across Android
versions 1-15 [20]. Then, for each API class–method signature,
we located all repository versions in which that API appears.
Subsequently, we selected the earliest timestamp as the API
call’s ﬁrst introduction date and added it to a table recording
the ﬁrst appearance of each API call. This table is used
to identify the API call with the most recent introduction
timestamp for an app as a lower bound for its market re-
lease date. To do so, direct matching by exact class-method
signatures may fail due to Java inheritance mechanisms,
where applications can invoke APIs through parent classes
or interfaces rather than the speciﬁc implementing class. To
address this challenge, we developed a multi-level matching
strategy supported by creating additional tables based on [20],
[21]. The key tables are inheritance hierarchy mapping for
class relationships, and API level to package-class-method
mapping with corresponding Android version release dates
for complementary API call timestamp matching. If direct
API call matching fails, inheritance hierarchy-based matching
is used. If the latter step fails as well, we adopt API level
mapping and the corresponding Android version release dates.
Using this process, we identiﬁed the introduction timestamp
for all of the standard API calls extracted from all the apps in
our dataset. It is important to note that our analysis focuses
exclusively on standard APIs documented in the Android
Developer reference. The excluded APIs represent only 0.4%
of all API calls extracted from the apps in our dataset.
We analyzed temporal consistency across 40,000 samples by
comparing the app’s latest API call timestamp as the temporal
lower bound with AndroZoo’s uploadDate or VirusTotal’s
ﬁrst submission date when uploadDate is not available. Tem-
poral discrepancy occurs when the app’s latest API times-
tamp is later than the AndroZoo uploadDate or VirusTotal
ﬁrst submission date (we compared the year only). Our anal-
ysis revealed that the temporal discrepancy rate was at most
0.02% across all years, which conﬁrmed both uploadDate
and ﬁrst submission date as reliable timestamps to estimate
the app market release date for time-based machine learning
experiments.
B. Feature Extraction
Static analysis involves analyzing the source code of An-
droid apps without running them. Static features are extracted
from the APK ﬁles, specially the AndroidManifest.xml and
Dalvik Executable (.dex) ﬁles. The most commonly used static
features include permissions, API calls, and opcode sequences.
1) Opcode n-gram features: Opcodes have proven partic-
ularly valuable, as they capture low-level execution patterns

APK
Data Preprocessing
Feature Extraction
Permission
API Call
Opcode
Permission 
(161d Binary Vector)
API Call 
(95d Binary Vector)
Opcode 3-gram 
(2750d Binary Vector)
BYOL Self-supervised Pre-training
Feature Input
(Opcode/
API Call/
Permission)
Workflow
API Call-Based Timestamp Verification
Inconsistent
Consistent
BYOL Pre-training
 LR Binary Classification
Opcode
(128d Embeddings)
API Call
(128d Embeddings)
Permission
(128d Embeddings)
384d Embeddings
5-Fold Time-based CV
Augment
Dropout 0.01
View 1
[0, 1, 0, 1, ..., 0]
View 2
[0, 1, 0, 0, ..., 0]
Target
Network
Projector
Predictor
Encoder
Encoder
Loss
Online
Network
Projector
Later Than?
API Calls Latest
 Introduction Time
uploadDate
first_submission_date
or
Fig. 1. Overview of Our Methodology
that can reveal malicious behaviors and remain less dependent
on high-level obfuscation. Opcodes are often processed using
n-gram models (e.g., FAMCF [22] and FAMD [23]). Further
analysis in [24] showed that smaller N values (3 or 4) yield
the best malware classiﬁcation performance. Moreover, some
studies such as DeepDetect [25] and DeepReﬁner [26] use
a simpliﬁed or reduced instruction set to enhance efﬁciency.
We employed a 17-category symbolic mapping system that
extends DeepReﬁner [26]’s 15-category classiﬁcation with 2
additional categories (invoke-polymorphic/custom and const-
method) based on the latest Android version opcodes [27].
Android APKs were decompiled using Apktool [28] and
baksmali [29] to extract Dalvik opcodes, which were mapped
to the symbolic categories. We represented each APK as
a concatenated app-level symbolic sequence and generated
a binary one-hot vector of 3-gram features capturing the
presence or absence of each pattern. After excluding zero-
occurrence patterns from the training set, this resulted in
2,750-dimensional binary feature vectors for each application.
2) API calls and permissions: We extracted both API calls
and permissions from Android apps using Androguard. Our
initial feature set included the same permissions and API calls
used in [4]. We augmented the feature set with 103 warning-
level permissions. These permissions were extracted from
VirusTotal reports for our malware samples, retaining only
standard Android framework permissions and excluding app-
deﬁned ones. API calls and permissions were encoded as 95-
dimensional and 161-dimensional binary vectors, respectively,
indicating the presence or absence of each feature.
C. Self Supervised Learning and Binary Classiﬁcation
AS we mentioned in Section II, self-supervised learning
methods have shown promises for Android malware detection.
1) Overview of the BYOL architecture and pre-training
mechanism: We employed BYOL [7] as our self-supervised
representation learning framework for Android app features.
BYOL consists of two neural networks: an online network
comprising encoder, projector, and predictor multilayer per-
ceptrons, and a target network containing only encoder and
projector components. The encoder uses a three-layer MLP
architecture with batch normalization and ReLU activations
between layers, while both the projector and predictor employ
two-layer MLPs with batch normalization on the hidden layer.
The target network parameters are updated via exponential
moving average of the online network parameters, providing
a slowly moving teacher signal that enables learning with-
out requiring negative samples or contrastive pairs. During
training, two augmented views are created from each input
sample, with the online network trained to predict the target
network’s projections using cosine similarity loss between
normalized prediction and target vectors. For our binary
Android features (permissions/API calls/opcode 3-gram se-
quences), we created augmented views using feature dropout,
randomly masking present features while preserving semantic
validity by avoiding the introduction of non-existing fea-
tures. Given the dimensional imbalance between feature types
(2,750-dimensional opcode 3-gram vectors, 95-dimensional
API vectors, 161-dimensional permission vectors), we trained
separate BYOL models for each feature type. This prevents
high-dimensional features from dominating the representa-
tion space. Each modality-speciﬁc encoder generates 128-
dimensional embeddings, which are concatenated into a 384-
dimensional representation, ensuring equal contribution from
each feature type.
2) Design rationale for adopting BYOL: Although our
dataset includes a substantial number of labeled benign and
malicious Android apps, we adopt BYOL as a self-supervised
pre-training framework to enhance the quality of feature
representations prior to supervised classiﬁcation. Our design
choice is motivated by two key considerations. First, in An-

droid malware analysis, labels can be noisy or inconsistent
due to changing app behavior and reliance on heuristic or
antivirus consensus. BYOL leverages the entire dataset, re-
gardless of label accuracy, to learn generalized and behav-
iorally meaningful representations that capture latent semantic
relationships among applications. Second, unlike contrastive
methods, BYOL removes the need for explicit negative pairs.
In malware datasets, negative samples are hard to deﬁne
because different applications often share similar API calls
or permissions. Without contrastive loss, BYOL avoids this
issue and produces more stable embeddings. In summary,
BYOL learns obfuscation-resilient and behaviorally consistent
embeddings from unlabeled permission, API calls, and opcode
features. This approach combines the generalization power of
self-supervision with the precision of supervised learning, im-
proving robustness to unseen malware and mitigating concept
drift from evolving Android behaviors.
3) Binary Classiﬁcation with Time-based Cross-Validation:
We selected LR model as the binary classiﬁer for malware
detection due to its ability to efﬁciently process continuous,
dense embeddings produced by BYOL. It offers linear inter-
pretability through its coefﬁcients, and leverages L2 regular-
ization to mitigate overﬁtting. We applied inverse-frequency
class weighting to address the class imbalance in our dataset.
Moreover, we applied a tailored ﬁve-fold time-based cross-
validation on the training set for hyperparameter tuning.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS OF
RESULTS
We conducted our experiments on a MacBook Air with
Apple M2 processor and 16 GB memory. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our proposed system, the LR classiﬁer was
trained on the BYOL embeddings generated for different
feature sets using ﬁve-fold cross-validation procedure with hy-
perparameter tuning. For the full set of BYOL hyperparameter
settings, we refer the interested reader to our public GitHub
repository. Table II presents the test-set results for the LR
classiﬁer using different feature sets, alongside the prediction
performance of a Random Forest (RF) classiﬁer trained on the
full feature set. The linear nature of LR is well-suited to the
structured representation space created by BYOL pre-training.
As shown in the table, when we use all of the extracted static
features, i.e., permissions, API calls and opcode sequences,
the best performance for LR is achieved. When trained on
all features, the RF classiﬁer attains higher precision (97%
vs. 89%), indicating a more conservative detector with fewer
false positives but more missed malware samples. However,
in malware detection, we prioritize higher recall to minimize
false negatives.
In the following, we focus on the analysis of the results
of the LR classiﬁer on the full feature set. To assess the
limitations of our approach, we examined false-negative (FN)
malware samples among the 400 malicious apps in our test
set. Using VirusTotal behavior reports, we extracted the cor-
responding MITRE ATT&CK signatures for each sample.
MITRE ATT&CK is an openly accessible framework that
TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE
Feature Set
F1 Score
Recall
Precision
Accuracy
API
57%
58%
57%
91%
OPCODE
65%
64%
66%
93%
PERM
81%
84%
78%
96%
API+OPCODE
70%
68%
72%
94%
API+PERM
82%
82%
83%
96%
OPCODE+PERM
87%
85%
89%
97%
ALL
89%
89%
89%
98%
ALL (RF)
83%
73%
97%
97%
organizes adversary tactics and techniques derived from real-
world threat activity. Tactics are the reasons why an attacker
performs an action whereas techniques describe how adver-
saries achieve their tactical goals by carrying out speciﬁc
actions. MITRE provides a dedicated matrix for Android
platform that includes the list of tactics and techniques [30].
Our analysis revealed notable behavioral differences between
FN samples and true positives (TPs):
1) Obfuscation Detection: Using VirusTotal’s obfuscation
tag, we found that approximately 71% of all malware were
labeled as obfuscated; among these, 89.7% were correctly
detected (TPs), while only 10.3% were missed (FNs). We
observe a similar trend using MITRE ATT&CK mappings
(technique T1406: Obfuscated Files or Information) extracted
from VirusTotal reports, where 68% of all malware samples
exhibited obfuscation-related defense-evasion behavior. Again,
about 90% of these samples were correctly identiﬁed as TPs.
In general, most of the obfuscated malware was successfully
detected by the LR classiﬁer, with only a small fraction
evading detection. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our
BYOL-based pre-training combined with LR classiﬁcation in
handling obfuscated malware.
2) Attack Patterns: Table III shows tactic prevalence in FNs
and TPs for our Android detector. Collection and Discovery
exhibit uniformly high rates in both FNs and TPs (around
80%), indicating these behaviors are widespread and thus
weakly discriminative. In contrast, Command and Control
(80.2% TP vs. 60.9% FN) and Credential Access (40.1% TP
vs. 8.7% FN) are more prevalent among TPs, suggesting our
proposed model is particularly effective in detecting commu-
nication and credential theft signals.
In terms of speciﬁc techniques, we focus on the most signif-
icant patterns due to space limitations. Within command and
control, TP samples demonstrated higher usage of application
layer protocols (80% TP vs. 59% FN) and encrypted channels
(80% TP vs. 59% FN). For collection, TP samples showed
more intrusive behaviors including audio recording (45% TP
vs. 35% FN), clipboard monitoring (20% TP vs. 4% FN),
and accessing sensitive device logs (25% TP vs. 0% FN). FN
samples exhibited notable defense evasion through device data
deletion (18% TP vs. 28% FN), suggesting active evidence
removal. Within discovery, patterns were mixed: FN samples
favored basic system information gathering (68% TP vs.
80% FN), while TP samples conducted more comprehensive
software discovery (54% TP vs. 41% FN).

TABLE III
MAIN TACTICS USED BY ATTACKERS
Tactic
FN (%)
TP (%)
Collection
82.6
79.9
Command and Control
60.9
80.2
Credential Access
8.7
40.1
Defense Evasion
76.1
70.3
Discovery
82.6
80.8
Impact
28.3
20.9
Network Effects
21.7
16.9
Overall, these results motivate augmenting evasion-aware
features and integrating dynamic/network telemetry, while
treating Collection/Discovery as baseline behaviors that re-
quire stronger contextual cues to improve separability.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we addressed temporal bias in ML-based
Android malware detection by constructing a time-stamped
dataset of benign and malicious apps. We also proposed an
API call–based timestamp veriﬁcation method to validate app
release time estimation. Using this dataset, we applied time-
aware cross-validation with a logistic regression classiﬁer and
incorporated BYOL self-supervised learning to enhance static
feature representations. Our FN/TP analysis, based on MITRE
ATT&CK behavior patterns from VirusTotal, highlighted the
effectiveness of our system in detecting obfuscated malware.
Future work will focus on reﬁning feature representations
(e.g., adding evasion-aware features) as well as changing the
representation of the apps (e.g., converting APKs to images),
to further analyze and strengthen real-world malware detection
performance. Moreover, we plan to conduct a deeper compari-
son with prior SSL and representation-learning approaches for
Android malware detection, and to evaluate a broader range
of classiﬁers for more comprehensive benchmarking.