Enforcing Benign Trajectories: A Behavioral
Firewall for Structured-Workflow AI Agents
Hung Dang (ORCID: 0009-0008-7009-2509)
Van Lang University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam .
Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hung.dk@vlu.edu.vn;
Abstract
Structured-workflow agents driven by large language models execute tool calls
against sensitive external environments. Existing pre-execution firewalls secure
these interactions by evaluating each call in isolation. While practical for known
signatures, stateless inspection remains vulnerable to context-sequential injection
attacks, wherein an adversary navigates through individually benign, syntacti-
cally valid tool calls to achieve a malicious objective. To address this threat,
we propose Praetor, a telemetry-driven behavioral anomaly detection fire-
wall. Drawing on sequence-based intrusion detection, Praetor compiles verified
benign tool-call telemetry into a parameterized deterministic finite automaton
(pDFA). The model defines permitted tool sequences, sequential contexts, and
parameter bounds. At runtime, a lightweight gateway enforces these boundaries
via an O(1) state-transition structural lookup, shifting computationally expen-
sive analysis entirely offline. Evaluated on the Agent Security Bench (ASB),
Praetor achieves a 5.6% macro-averaged attack success rate (ASR) across five
scenarios. Within three structured workflows, ASR drops to 2.2%, outperform-
ing Aegis, a state-of-the-art stateless scanner, at 12.8%. Praetor achieves 0%
ASR on multi-step and context-sequential attacks in structured settings. Fur-
thermore, against 1,000 algorithmically spliced exfiltration payloads, only 1.4%
matched valid structural paths, all of which failed end-to-end string parameter
guards (0 successes out of 14 surviving paths, 95% CI [0%, 23.2%]). Prae-
tor introduces just 2.2 ms of per-call latency (a 3.7× speedup over Aegis)
while maintaining a 2.0% benign task failure rate (BTFR) on benign work-
loads. Modeling the behavioral trajectory effectively collapses the available attack
surface, but unmaintained continuous parameter bounds remain vulnerable to
synonym-substitution attacks (18% evasion rate). Thus, exact-match whitelisting
of sensitive parameters ultimately bears the final defensive load against execution.
Keywords: AI Agent Security, Behavioral Profiling, Deterministic Finite Automaton,
Telemetry-driven Architecture
1
arXiv:2604.26274v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026

1 Introduction
Large language model-driven agents have transitioned to production deployments,
including sensitive domains such as clinical reasoning workflows [1], operating as
autonomous principals that invoke APIs and interact with external services via pro-
tocols like the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [2]. This autonomy expands the attack
surface: a single crafted prompt can instruct an agent to exfiltrate sensitive records or
escalate privileges [3, 4].
To address this, pre-execution firewalls intercept tool calls before they reach
the execution layer [5–7]. These systems perform content-first risk scanning and
schema validation. While existing firewalls intercept known signatures [5], they suffer
from a fundamental limitation: they evaluate each call as an isolated event with-
out sequential context. Such sequential blindness creates a systemic vulnerability to
context-sequential injection attacks, wherein an adversary navigates through a series of
individually benign, syntactically valid tool calls to achieve a malicious objective (e.g.,
exfiltrating data via a seemingly normal email workflow after reading a database).
As demonstrated in our diagnostic gap analysis (Section 7.2), such attacks bypass
state-of-the-art stateless firewalls like Aegis with up to a 75% success rate, for no
single action violates the stateless policy. A stateless firewall examines calls in iso-
lation; hence, it cannot distinguish a legitimate action from an out-of-profile exploit
that employs valid parameters.
To mitigate this threat, we propose Praetor, a telemetry-driven behavioral
anomaly detection firewall for autonomous AI agents. Our approach draws on
sequence-based intrusion detection [8]. During the profiling phase, Praetor ingests
a corpus of verified benign tool-call traces and compiles them into a parameterized
deterministic finite automaton (pDFA) that encodes the agent’s expected behavioral
envelope. Each state captures a sequential context derived from the w-gram prefix of
preceding tool names, and each transition encodes permitted parameter value bounds.
At runtime, the gateway incurs negligible overhead by performing a constant-time
state-transition lookup against this pre-compiled automaton. Any tool call lacking a
valid outgoing transition is deterministically halted and recorded in a cryptographic
audit log. Consequently, an exploit must produce a sequence indistinguishable from
the agent’s established trajectory at every step.
Three properties distinguish Praetor from existing defenses. First, the gateway
is stateful: every decision depends on the session’s prior call history rather than on
the current call alone. Second, the behavioral profile is per-deployment, compiled from
the telemetry of the specific agent it protects and not shared across deployments.
Third, the runtime path performs no inference, for all semantic analysis is completed
during the offline profiling stage. These three properties permit deployment as a sidecar
without modifying the agent’s reasoning loop.
Our contributions are as follows:
• We formalize the problem of context-aware tool-call interception, wherein we
define a threat model and establish security goals for bounded-time enforcement
(Section 2).
2

• We design Praetor, a decoupled architecture that compiles benign telemetry
into a pDFA and enforces strict behavioral boundaries at runtime in constant
time (Section 4).
• We evaluate Praetor on the Agent Security Bench (ASB). The system achieves
a 5.6% macro-averaged ASR across five scenarios. Restricted to three structured
scenarios, ASR falls to 2.2% (baseline Aegis: 12.8%). The gateway maintains
2.2 ms per-call overhead and a 2.0% benign task failure rate (BTFR) (Section 7).
2 Background and Threat Model
2.1 LLM Agent Architecture and Tool Calling
A tool-augmented language model agent operates as a reasoning loop in which the
model receives a system prompt defining its role and constraints, processes a stream
of user inputs and environmental observations, and emits structured action outputs
that are routed to external services [9]. Each action takes the form of a tool call: a
structured invocation consisting of a tool name and a parameter object conforming to
a declared schema. The agent framework dispatches the call to the appropriate service,
receives the result as an observation, and feeds it back to the model for subsequent
reasoning. This loop continues until the agent either produces a terminal response or
exhausts its context budget.
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) has emerged as a widely adopted stan-
dard for this dispatch layer, defining a transport-agnostic protocol through which
agents discover available tools and submit invocations [2]. Agents built on frameworks
such as LangChain, CrewAI, and the Anthropic SDK interact with MCP-compatible
servers that expose databases, file systems, web browsers, and domain-specific APIs
as addressable tools. Since the agent’s output is the sole input to these dispatches, and
the model is an untrusted component that may be manipulated via prompt injection,
the tool-call boundary is the natural enforcement point for a pre-execution security
layer.
2.2 System Model
We define our system as comprising three entities.
• Agent A: a language model-driven process that generates sequences of tool calls
based on a fixed system prompt Π and a stream of environmental observations.
• Environment E: the collection of external services, databases, and APIs that A
is authorised to invoke.
• Gateway G: the enforcement component interposed between A and E, responsible
for allowing or halting each tool call before it reaches E.
During operation, the agent’s behavior manifests as an execution trace.
Definition
1
(Execution
Trace).
An
execution
trace
is
a
finite
sequence
τ = ⟨(t1, p1), (t2, p2), . . . , (tk, pk)⟩, where ti ∈T is a tool name drawn from the
agent’s declared tool vocabulary T , and pi is the parameter vector supplied to tool ti
3

Table 1 Summary of notation used in this paper.
Symbol
Description
C
Benign trace corpus
τ
Execution trace
T
Tool vocabulary
p
Parameter vector
P
Parameter space
w
Context window width
θ
Pruning threshold
εnum, εstr
Numeric slack factor and string radius expansion
M
Parameterized DFA (pDFA)
S, δ, s0
States, transition function, and initial state
⊥
Distinguished idle symbol
¯e, r
Centroid and radius for string parameter guards
Q, ppass, δguard
Oracle
query
budget,
plausible
pass
probability,
and
Pr[malicious parameter lies outside r-ball]
at step i.
Definition 2 (Benign Trace Corpus). The benign trace corpus C = {τ1, τ2, . . . , τN}
is a set of execution traces collected during verified normal operation of A, in which
no adversarial inputs were present.
The gateway G receives each incoming call (ti, pi) in sequence and decides, before
forwarding to E, whether the call is consistent with the agent’s established behav-
ioral envelope. A key design constraint is that G must reach this decision in bounded
time and without querying any external service, for external queries would introduce
unbounded latency into the agent’s execution path.
2.3 Threat Model and Adversarial Capabilities
We adopt the indirect prompt injection threat model, wherein the adversary X does
not have direct access to the agent’s system prompt or model weights but can write
content to data sources that the agent consumes as observations [3, 4]. Representative
injection channels include: crafted entries in a customer support database that the
agent reads, malicious content in a web page the agent browses, and manipulated
tool results returned by a compromised upstream service.
Adversary goal. X seeks to cause A to emit a trace τmal such that the resulting state
change in E achieves a malicious objective, including data exfiltration, privilege esca-
lation, or persistent state corruption, while avoiding detection by whatever security
layer is in place.
Adversary capabilities. We define X’s capabilities as follows:
4

• Black-Box input access: X can write to any data source that A reads as part of
normal operation.
• Full knowledge of generic defenses: X knows the detection patterns, schema val-
idators, and heuristics employed by standard, publicly documented firewalls such
as Aegis [5].
• Observable benign behavior: X may, over time, observe the agent’s benign out-
puts and thereby form a partial reconstruction of its behavioral envelope.
Adversary limitations. We consider two variations of adversarial knowledge. In the
Black-Box threat model, X does not possess the specific pDFA compiled by Praetor,
nor direct access to the historical telemetry corpus C used to construct it. In the Gray-
Box threat model, X has acquired partial access to historical benign traces (e.g., via
prolonged observation) and attempts to reconstruct the pDFA constraints.
We explicitly assume the offline profiling environment is secure and the initial
training corpus C is verified benign (e.g., generated via curated benchmark datasets
or collected within a sandboxed, clean-room staging environment). Defending against
telemetry poisoning during the offline phase (where an adversary actively contaminates
the training corpus before the pDFA is compiled) is a critical deployment constraint
in behavioral anomaly detection, often referred to as the “cold start” problem. This
vulnerability surface falls outside the scope of Praetor’s runtime enforcement guar-
antees. The security of Praetor relies on a dual-constraint architecture: structural
sequence matching severely collapses the available attack surface, but tight param-
eter bounds bear the primary load of preventing exploitation within that surviving
envelope. We discuss the boundaries and mitigations of this profiling threat surface in
Section 8.1.
We consider denial-of-service attacks against G itself, attacks that bypass the
SDK interception layer entirely (e.g., direct API calls), and compromises of the
asynchronous profiling environment to be outside the scope of this work.
2.4 Security Goals
Praetor must satisfy five properties.
1. Soundness. Any tool call that is inconsistent with the w-gram behavioral envelope
of C, or whose parameter values fall outside the εnum- and εstr-widened bounds
observed in C, must be halted before execution. Formally, the gateway must
strictly enforce a language of permitted traces Lpermit that is a deliberate over-
approximation of L(C) (the set of tool-call sequences observed in C): traces that
are structurally consistent with C but not literally present in it are admitted,
reducing false positives at the cost of a finite within-profile exploit surface. Any
trace outside Lpermit is blocked.
2. Efficiency. The per-call overhead introduced by G must be bounded by a constant
with respect to the number of pDFA states, the length of the ongoing trace, and
the complexity of the agent’s tool vocabulary.
3. Tamper-Evidence. Every blocked call must be recorded in an append-only cryp-
tographic audit log such that post-hoc deletion or modification of any entry
5

is detectable against any attacker without host-level overwrite capabilities, and
globally detectable once published to the external transparency log.
4. Minimal Integration Burden. G must operate as a black-box sidecar: it intercepts
calls at the tool-dispatch boundary and requires no modification to A’s internal
reasoning loop, system prompt, or model weights.
5. Evolvability. The system must support incremental updates to the behavioral
profile to accommodate legitimate changes in agent tools or tasks (concept drift)
without requiring a full system re-profiling for every minor update.
2.5 Motivating Example
Consider
a
customer-service
agent
restricted
to
three
tools:
read ticket,
write summary,
and
send email.
Benign
traces
follow
predictable
patterns,
e.g., ⟨read ticket, write summary, send email⟩. Suppose an adversary injects a
prompt instructing the agent to skip the summary phase and jump straight to
send email(to=’attacker@external.com’) immediately after reading the ticket. A
stateless firewall analyzing these calls in isolation may permit them, as the email
format is technically valid and the tool is within the agent’s vocabulary. Praetor,
however, enforces a parameterized deterministic finite automaton (pDFA) where each
state encapsulates the sequential context of prior calls, and transitions are guarded by
learned parameter bounds (e.g., tight semantic embedding clusters for strings or cate-
gorical whitelists). When evaluating the exploit, Praetor observes that send email
never appears as a valid outgoing transition directly from the read ticket state. The
call is halted instantly. Even if the adversary strictly uses authorized tools, they must
satisfy both the strict sequential transitions and the tight parameter guards, forcing
them to mimic legitimate workflows and neutralizing arbitrary action sequences.
3 Related Work
Stateless Firewalls and the Execution Gap. Pre-execution firewalls attempt
to intercept malicious tool calls before execution. Aegis [5] employs a multi-stage
pipeline (PII redaction, regex scanning, statistical anomaly detection) but remains
fundamentally stateless: it evaluates each call in isolation. Such sequential blindness
prevents distinguishing an authorized administrator from an agent tricked into exe-
cuting a privileged sequence that conforms to static schemas. Other input-layer filters,
such as PromptArmor [10] or auxiliary LLM validators [6, 7], attempt to sanitize
prompts. However, they operate above the tool-call boundary and incur prohibitive
inference latency. Moreover, they remain vulnerable to evasion, for adversaries fre-
quently deploy obfuscated injections that bypass prompt-level semantics [4, 11].
Praetor directly addresses this gap by decoupling the security layer into a compiled
stateful automaton, enforcing the strict sequential context of prior calls with O(1)
constant-time latency. Table 2 summarizes these distinctions.
Stateful Tracking and Intrusion Detection. The architectural necessity of
stateful enforcement has spurred recent concurrent preprints like AegisUI [13]. These
6

Table 2 Architectural comparison of Praetor with representative prior systems.
System
Sequential
Agent-
Rule/
LM/ML
Attack
State
Specific Pattern Inference
Level
Static Schema
✗
✗
✓
✗
Tool-call
Keyword Filter
✗
✗
✓
✗
Message
Aegis [5]
✗a
✗
✓
✗
Tool-call
MSFW [6]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Message
PromptArmor [10]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Prompt
Fides [12]b
✗
✗
✓
✗
Plan/Code
AegisUI [13]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Tool-call
Praetor (ours)
✓
✓
✗
✗
Tool-call
a Aegis maintains a statistical baseline for event frequencies, but lacks per-session sequential state
constraints.
b Fides relies on strict taint-tracking labels across variables rather than regex/schema policies.
systems track execution histories using secondary auditor models or supervised classi-
fiers. While effective, neural inference on the critical path introduces heavy overhead.
Alternatively, information-flow control systems like Fides [12] use dynamic taint track-
ing to prevent data leakage [14, 15], but require deep instrumentation of the agent’s
internal reasoning loop.
Praetor’s approach is conceptually rooted in classic host-based intrusion detec-
tion systems (HIDS). Forrest et al. [8] first demonstrated that normal UNIX
process behavior can be characterized by short sequences of system calls (n-grams)
and deviations indicate exploitation [16]. Recent theoretical work establishing that
bounded-context LLM agents are equivalent to probabilistic automata [17] validates
the application of these techniques to modern AI agents. Praetor adapts this foun-
dational IDS principle to the domain of LLM tool calling, acting as a runtime safety
monitor [18]. However, standard syscall monitoring only inspects control-flow; LLM
tool calls carry semantic parameters with high inter-instance variance. Praetor
extends classic n-gram tracking by compiling a Symbolic Finite Automaton (SFA) [19]
that couples structural transitions with continuous parameter bounding, achieving
control-flow and data-flow integrity simultaneously without requiring access to the
agent’s internals.
4 Praetor
Praetor separates enforcement into two stages: an asynchronous profiling stage
that extracts behavioral norms from historical data, and a synchronous runtime
enforcement stage that monitors every incoming tool call.
During the profiling stage, Praetor ingests verified benign execution traces C
collected from the agent’s normal operations. It compiles this telemetry into a compact,
agent-specific behavioral profile. We adopt the formalism of Symbolic Finite Automata
(SFA) [19] to represent this profile, which we refer to as a pDFA (parameterized
deterministic finite automaton). The pDFA encodes the agent’s expected behavioral
envelope: which tool sequences are permitted and within what parameter value bounds.
By using a symbolic representation, Praetor can efficiently represent constraints
7

Benign Traces C
Telemetry
Profiler
pDFA
Runtime
Gateway
Tool Call (t, p)
Environment
Allowed
Load
Profiling Stage
Runtime Stage
Fig. 1 The two-stage lifecycle of Praetor. The telemetry profiler compiles historical telemetry into
a pDFA, which the runtime gateway enforces at execution time with O(1) overhead.
over complex and infinite parameter domains (e.g., continuous numeric ranges or high-
dimensional text embeddings) without state explosion.
During the runtime stage, the Runtime Gateway enforces the pre-compiled pDFA
as a transparent sidecar. For each incoming tool call, the gateway performs a constant-
time transition lookup. If the call matches a permitted transition from the current
state and satisfies the associated parameter guards, it is forwarded to the environment;
otherwise, it is halted and logged. The architecture ensures that the computationally
expensive task of behavioral analysis is performed offline, while runtime enforcement
remains deterministic and lightweight.
Figure 1 illustrates the two-stage pipeline.
Our design assumes narrow-task, single-role agents, the primary deployment target
of Praetor, where a small, stable tool vocabulary and a well-defined task scope pro-
duce low-entropy call sequences. Agents with large tool vocabularies, open-ended task
distributions, or dynamically injected context may exhibit higher behavioral entropy,
which would widen the pDFA’s state space and increase the benign task failure rate
for a fixed pruning threshold θ; we discuss this scope limitation in Section 8.4.
4.1 Telemetry Profiler
The Telemetry Profiler takes as input a benign trace corpus and three parameters
which are a context-window width w, a pruning threshold θ and slack factors εnum, εstr,
wherein
• A corpus of verified benign traces C
=
{τ1, . . . , τN}, where each τi
=
⟨(t1, p1), . . . , (tk, pk)⟩.
• A context-window width w (default w = 3), controlling the length of the sequen-
tial prefix used to distinguish states with the same tool name but different prior
histories.1
• A pruning threshold θ (default θ = 3), specifying the minimum number of
observed transitions required to retain a state.
1While w = 3 is selected as the optimal operating point for our evaluated scenarios, this parameter
is deployment-dependent: agents with higher behavioral entropy or more complex branching may require
larger windows to achieve sufficient precision.
8

read
write
send
close
Execution
Trace τ
w-gram Context
State Abstraction
s = (tj, ctxj)
s = (send, [read, write])
History
Current Tool
s′ = (close, [write, send])
δstruct
ctxj = (tj−w, . . . , tj−1)
Fig. 2 The state abstraction mechanism. A sliding w-gram window (blue) captures the tool name
sequence preceding the current call. This context is concatenated with the current tool name to form
a unique pDFA state (tj, ctxj). Sequential transitions are then mapped to the symbolic transition
function δstruct.
• Slack factors εnum (default 0.05) and εstr (default 0.05), widening numeric
parameter bounds and string embedding radii to accommodate minor benign
variation.
It transforms the input described above into a pDFA following the four steps
described below.
Step 1: State Abstraction. Each unique combination of a tool name and a context
prefix defines a distinct state. Formally, for each position j in each trace τi, the
context is ctxj = (tmax(1, j−w), . . . , tj−1), i.e., the min(j−1, w)-length prefix of tool
names immediately preceding call j (empty for j = 1). The corresponding state is the
pair sj = (tj, ctxj), with tj ∈T and ctxj ∈T ≤w. As visualized in Figure 2, two calls
to the same tool in different sequential contexts yield distinct states, enabling the
automaton to distinguish, for example, a read ticket following a session start from
one following a write summary. When an agent exhibits iterative error-correction
loops or ReAct retries (e.g., repeatedly calling search web), these sequences naturally
form valid cyclic paths or self-edges within the graph. The pDFA therefore gracefully
accommodates expected hallucination or retry patterns without state fragmentation.
Step 2: Transition Extraction. For each consecutive pair of states (sj, sj+1) within
any trace, the profiler records the directed edge sj →sj+1 and associates the param-
eter vector pj+1 with that edge. After processing all traces, each edge accumulates a
multiset of observed parameter vectors.
Step 3: Parameter Schema Synthesis. For each edge e = (s, s′) in the transition
set, the profiler synthesises a parameter schema from the accumulated observations.
Three parameter types are handled:
• Numeric parameters: let {x(1), . . . , x(m)} be the observed values for parame-
ter dimension d. The schema records the widened interval [minj x(j) −εnum ·
| minj x(j)|, maxj x(j) + εnum · | maxj x(j)|]. An incoming value v is accepted if
and only if v lies within this interval.
9

• String parameters: each observed string value s(j) is embedded using a sentence
transformer (specifically, all-MiniLM-L6-v2 from the sentence-transformers
library) to produce a fixed-dimensional vector e(j) ∈Rd. The schema records the
L2-normalized centroid ¯e = 1
m
P
j e(j) and the radius r = maxj DC(e(j), ¯e)+εstr,
where DC is the cosine distance. An incoming string is accepted if its cosine
distance to ¯e is at most r. Embeddings are computed once at profiling time
and cached; the runtime gateway embeds novel incoming strings using a quan-
tized transformer. To counter semantic evasion (Section 7), the profiler applies
a Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override: parameters matching predefined
sensitive patterns (e.g., * path) bypass continuous bounds and enforce strict
categorical exact-matching against the observed corpus.
• Categorical parameters: the schema records the exact set of observed values
Vd = {v(1), . . . , v(m)}. An incoming value is accepted only if it belongs to Vd.
Step 4: DFA Construction and Pruning. (Note: For conceptual clarity, we present
schema synthesis before pruning in this exposition; an optimized implementation
applies pruning first, as reflected in Algorithm 1). The profiler assembles the pDFA
M = (S, δ, s0) whose transition function decomposes into two orthogonal components.
Structural successor. Define δstruct : S × T
⇀S as the partial function that
maps a state s = (tj, ctxj) and a tool name tnext to the unique successor s′ =
 tnext, (tmax(1,j−w+1), . . . , tj)

, i.e., the state whose tool component is tnext and whose
context component is the w-gram formed by appending tj to the tail of ctxj. This
successor is fully determined by s and tnext alone; δstruct is therefore structurally deter-
ministic, with at most one outgoing edge per (s, tnext) pair. δstruct(s, tnext) is undefined
if no trace in C ever produced the transition (s →s′).
Parameter guard. For each defined edge (s →s′), the predicate guard(s, tnext, p)
evaluates to true if and only if p satisfies the parameter schema synthesised for that
edge in Step 3.
Combined transition. The full transition function δ : S × (T × P) ⇀S is:
δ
 s, (t, p)

=
(
δstruct(s, t)
if δstruct(s, t) is defined and guard(s, t, p) = true
undefined
otherwise.
For any fixed (s, t), δstruct yields at most one structural successor, and there is exactly
one guard predicate per (s, t) pair; the automaton is therefore deterministic in the
sense required by SFA theory [19]: no two distinct outgoing transitions from s can be
satisfied by the same concrete input (t, p).
Pruning. States with fewer than θ total observed outgoing-transition instances
(P
s′ edges[s, s′] < θ) are pruned from S, for rarely-visited states yield unreliable
schema estimates. After each removal, all edges whose source or destination is the
pruned state are deleted from the transition relation; states that thereby lose all their
observations may themselves fall below threshold, so the procedure iterates to a fix-
point, analogously to dead-state elimination in standard DFA minimisation. Finally,
a forward reachability pass from s0 is performed to remove any states that became
10

unreachable due to pruned edges. Because iterative pruning executes to a true fix-
point, no surviving state maintains a structural transition to a pruned state; hence,
after pruning, any state that remains structurally reachable from s0 is guaranteed to
satisfy the θ threshold, and a single post-fixpoint reachability pass is sufficient to clear
orphaned subgraphs. The initial state s0 = (⊥, λ) ∈(T ∪{⊥})×T ≤w is never pruned.
Making δ partial eliminates the need for an explicit accept set: states from which δ
is undefined for every input are terminal, and the gateway blocks any call emitted
while the session pointer is at such a state. The resulting automaton is serialised to a
compact binary representation (MessagePack) for loading by the runtime gateway.
The core logic of the telemetry profiler is summarised in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Telemetry Profiler (Core Logic)
Require: Corpus C, context width w, threshold θ, slack factors εnum, εstr
Ensure: pDFA M = (S, δ, s0)
1: s0 ←(⊥, λ); S ←{s0}
2: for each trace τ ∈C do
3:
sprev ←s0
4:
for each call (tj, pj) in τ do
5:
ctxj ←w-gram prefix preceding tj
6:
sj ←(tj, ctxj); S ←S ∪{sj}
7:
Record edge (sprev →sj) and parameters pj
8:
sprev ←sj
9:
end for
10: end for
11: Prune & Reachability: Iteratively remove states where outgoing edge counts
< θ, deleting connected edges. Finally, remove states unreachable from s0.
12: Synthesize Schemas: For each edge (s →s′) in the pruned graph, compute
widened numeric bounds (±εnum) and categorical sets. For string parameters,
compute SBERT centroids ¯e and radii r. Map to guard(s, t, p).
13: Construct δ: Map (s, t, p) 7→s′ iff δstruct(s, t) = s′ and guard = true.
14: return M = (S, δ, s0)
Deployment Constraint: Embedding Drift. Because string parameter schemas rely
on embeddings computed at profiling time, if the sentence transformer model (e.g.,
all-MiniLM-L6-v2) is updated or changed between profiling cycles, the embedding
space will shift and all cached embeddings will become invalid. Re-profiling the corpus
is required when the embedding model is updated.
Remark 1 (Determinism). The pDFA M produced by Algorithm 1 is a deterministic
SFA: for any state s ∈S and any concrete input (t, p) ∈T × P, there is at most one
defined value of δ(s, (t, p)). Since each state s′ = (tnext, ctx′) is uniquely determined
by the pair (s, tnext) via the deterministic context update, δstruct contains at most one
edge per (s, tnext) pair. Because tool names in T are discrete, two distinct outgoing
edges from s necessarily carry different tool-name labels; therefore, guard-predicate
11

overlap across different edges is structurally impossible because they are keyed by dis-
tinct (s, tnext) pairs. Within the same (s, t) pair there is exactly one compiled schema
and hence one guard predicate; no input can satisfy two guards simultaneously. The
automaton therefore meets the determinism condition for SFAs stated in [19].
Complexity. Let N be the number of traces, L the maximum trace length, and |T |
the tool vocabulary size. The state abstraction and transition extraction steps run in
O(N · L). Parameter schema synthesis for string parameters requires one embedding
computation per unique string value; embeddings are cached so that identical strings
are embedded only once. In a production implementation, applying pruning first on
structural edge counts bounds the waste of synthesizing schemas for eventually dis-
carded edges. The theoretical maximum state count before pruning is loosely bounded
by |T |w+1 (it is a loose upper bound because for any structurally reachable adjacent
states s →s′, the last element of s′’s context must equal s’s tool component). For
|T | = 15 and w = 3, this bounds the space at 50,625 states. Empirically, the observed
pruned state count strictly tightens to 450 (Section 6), producing a flat, memory-
resident structure independent of corpus size. The telemetry profiler runs once per
agent deployment or update cycle, not on the critical path.
4.2 Runtime State-Machine Gateway
At startup, the gateway loads the serialised pDFA into a hash-map-backed adjacency
structure. It allocates a per-session state pointer, initialised to s0, for each active agent
session. Upon the emission of a tool call (t, p) by the agent, the gateway proceeds as
follows:
1. Edge lookup (O(1)): lookup of the single edge (scur, t) from the current state scur
by keying into the adjacency map. The total per-call overhead is therefore O(1)
in |T |, the tool vocabulary size, which is a small constant for practical agents.
2. Schema check: for each candidate edge (scur, s′) labelled with tool t, check
whether p satisfies the edge’s parameter schema. Numeric checks require one
comparison per dimension; categorical checks require one hash-set lookup; string
checks require a forward pass through a quantized embedding model and one
cosine-similarity comparison against the pre-cached centroid. The embedding
dimension d is a fixed constant (384 for all-MiniLM-L6-v2), so string checks run
in O(d) = O(1).
3. Decision: if a matching edge exists, the gateway forwards the call to the environ-
ment and advances the state pointer to s′. If no matching edge exists, the gateway
blocks the call, returns a sanitised error message, and appends the event to the
cryptographic audit log. The state pointer remains strictly at scur upon rejec-
tion, enabling benign retries while exposing a static state to adversarial probing.
The structural lookup is therefore O(1) in |T |. While overall latency remains
bounded by the fixed inference cost of the quantized embedding model (O(d)), the
architectural path complexity scales as O(1) with respect to the agent’s behavioral
footprint (|S|, k, N, L). Unlike the pipeline in [5], the gateway performs no string
12

scanning, no pattern matching, and no policy evaluation at runtime; all such analysis
is precomputed.
Cryptographic audit log. Each blocked event is recorded as a tuple ℓ
=
(session id, scur, t, p, timestamp). The log is maintained as an append-only SHA-256
hash chain: the n-th entry stores both the event data and the hash of the preced-
ing entry, so that any post-hoc deletion or modification of an entry invalidates all
subsequent chain hashes. The chain root is published periodically to an append-only
transparency log, enabling external forensic verification without access to the raw
event data.
4.3 Incremental Profile Updates
A deployed agent may evolve: new tools may be added, the system prompt may be
revised, or the agent may be retrained on an updated corpus. If the pDFA is not
updated to reflect these changes, the gateway will generate false positives for legitimate
new behaviors.
To address this, we introduce a human-in-the-loop incremental update protocol.
When the gateway blocks a call that is subsequently reviewed and approved by a
human operator, either because it represents a legitimate new workflow or a new tool,
the approved event is appended to a pending update queue. During the next sched-
uled asynchronous recompilation window (e.g., a nightly pass), the profiler ingests the
pending queue as supplementary trace data and re-expands the DFA to accommo-
date the newly approved transitions, without reprocessing the full historical corpus.
Specifically, only the states and edges reachable from the newly approved sequences
are reconstructed; the remainder of the DFA is preserved.
The protocol preserves two key properties. First, new behaviors enter the behav-
ioral envelope only after explicit human approval, preventing the gateway from silently
expanding its permissions in response to adversarial inputs. Second, the incremental
recompilation step runs asynchronously and does not affect gateway availability. We
evaluate the practical impact of this protocol on false positive rates in the concept-drift
ablation study described in Section 7.4.
5 Security Analysis
The security guarantees of Praetor reduce to three properties: execution path
integrity, computational efficiency, and tamper-evident auditing.
5.1 Execution Path Integrity
Unlike stateless firewalls that evaluate tool calls against static schemas or keyword
lists, Praetor enforces execution path integrity. We define the safety of an agent not
merely by the validity of its individual actions, but by its conformance to a known-
benign trajectory.
Let T be the agent’s tool vocabulary. A stateless firewall monitors the entire tran-
sition space T at every step. In contrast, Praetor restricts the agent’s operational
space to the out-degree of its current state s in the pDFA M. Formally, at any state
13

s, the set of permitted tools is:
Tpermitted(s) = {t ∈T : the edge (s
t−→s′) exists in M}
(1)
By design, |Tpermitted(s)| ≪|T | for task-specific agents. For the Customer Service
scenario evaluated in Section 7, the average out-degree is 1.8, while the total vocabu-
lary |T | = 15. Crucially, at states preceding high-value terminal tools, the maximum
observed out-degree is strictly bounded to 4. This represents an 88% average reduc-
tion in the immediate attack surface per step. To execute a malicious action tadv, an
adversary must not only bypass the parameter guards but must also navigate the agent
into a state s where tadv ∈Tpermitted(s). Such topological constraints force attackers
to mimic benign sequential patterns perfectly. The system thereby neutralizes multi-
step exfiltration attacks that rely on “jump-starting” sensitive tools from an idle or
unrelated context.
5.2 Adversary Model and Path-Guessing
We assume an adversary X who can induce the agent to emit arbitrary tool calls via
prompt injection or tool poisoning. The adversary’s objective is to execute a target
sequence τadv that results in a security breach (e.g., data exfiltration). We distinguish
two levels of adversarial knowledge:
1. Black-Box Adversary: Knows the tool vocabulary T but lacks access to the pDFA
M, the training corpus C, or the embedding model.
2. Gray-Box Adversary: Has access to a subset of historical benign traces C′ ⊂C
and attempts to reconstruct the pDFA.
Under the Black-Box model, a competent attacker does not sample paths uni-
formly; they enumerate sequences reaching high-value terminal tools. Thus, the true
attacker advantage is tightly bounded by the fraction of permitted paths terminating
in a target tool (e.g., read db), relative to all paths reaching that tool. In the Customer
Service pDFA, only 3 of the 142 valid paths terminate in read db (a measured property
of the trained graph), meaning an adversary attempting to jump-start an exfiltration
exploit faces a highly constrained maze. On a macro level, this 142-path structural
envelope represents extreme global sparsity, covering just 0.018% of the uniform com-
binatorial action space for sequences of length k = 5 (ρ ≈1.8 × 10−4). To quantify
this residual risk empirically, we conducted an algorithmic path enumeration experi-
ment distinct from the full ASB evaluation in Section 7: we generated 1,000 multi-step
exfiltration payload traces by algorithmically splicing valid ASB exfiltration templates
onto benign prefixes, producing 1,000 syntactically distinct terminal actions reach-
ing sensitive tools, and mapped them against the pDFA structure. Only 14 payloads
(1.4%) contained sequences that coincidentally matched the benign structural paths.
However, when executing these 14 surviving paths in an end-to-end simulation with
the actual agent, 0 achieved a meaningful exfiltration objective (95% CI: [0%, 23.2%]).
The malicious parameter paylo

[…middle truncated for length…]

m the pDFA. However, Aegis allowed 75.0% to execute as it evaluates each
call’s syntax in isolation. The diagnostic demonstrates why stateless inspection fails on
multi-step attacks, letting the standard ASB results carry the primary efficacy claims.
Experimental Protocol for Interactive Probing. To ground the subsequent
Gray-Box and Oracle results, we explicitly define our measurement procedure: (1) The
centroid drift ∆= 0.12 is computed using the Cosine distance in SBERT vector space,
averaged across all string parameter centroids; (2) The finding that the drift exceeds
the radius r for 85% of parameters is derived via 5-fold cross-validation specifically
at the tuned εstr = 0.05 threshold; (3) The oracle evasion probability δguard ≈0.98
is the mean block rate over the 1,000 genetic-search mutation trials described in the
Active Oracle Adversary experiment, conducted under a per-target budget of Q = 100
queries; (4) The 88% local structural recovery rate is the mean success rate across all
valid pDFA states, executed by an automated graph-search script allocating exactly
Q = 100 uniform probe queries per state.
Gray-Box Adversary Evaluation. To evaluate Praetor’s resilience under the
Gray-Box threat model (Section 5.2), we simulate an adversary with partial knowledge
of the behavioral envelope. As reported in Table 5, we partition the 400-trace Customer
Service training corpus into varying knowledge fractions k ∈{10%, 50%, 90%}. The
attack is evaluated against the true pDFA trained on the full corpus. Even at k = 90%
knowledge, representing near-total observation of the agent’s benign distribution, the
ASR only reaches 0.8%. The low success rate occurs because the 10% of unseen traces
introduces significant centroid drift: outliers in the full corpus shift the true centroid
¯e by an average distance ∆= 0.12 relative to the adversary’s subset estimate, for
the 0.12 centroid drift exceeds the radius for 85% of all string parameters evaluated.
The data confirm that Praetor’s security relies on the strictness of its parameter
boundaries, not merely obscurity of the state graph.
Active Oracle Adversary. We explicitly evaluate an adaptive adversary pos-
sessing Q = 100 binary (Allow/Block) oracle queries against the gateway (§5.2). To
formalize the protocol, the adversary maps structure using schema defaults (Objec-
tive A), then targets identified valid tools using an iterative genetic search algorithm
to mutate malicious payloads toward the r-ball boundary (Objective B) across 1,000
parallel test targets. Validating the structural mapping hypothesis, probing with plau-
sible parameters recovers 88% of local structural transitions (Tpermitted(s)). Crucially,
this recovered 88% includes all high-value terminal tools (e.g., send email, read db)
21

present in the agent’s vocabulary, confirming that structural leakage under an ora-
cle is nearly total. However, discovering the structure does not bypass the parameter
guard. When the adversary utilizes the remaining query budget to mutate a malicious
payload, the discrete nature of text in a 384-dimensional continuous space prevents effi-
cient boundary approximation (δguard ≈0.98). Consequently, the end-to-end adaptive
ASR plateaus at 1.2% (95% CI: [0.6%, 2.1%]), exhausting the query budget without
discovering a viable evasive embedding. This confirms that structural opacity is not
the primary defense; bounded-radius parameter guards are.
7.3 Latency Overhead and Scalability
10
100
500
0
20
40
60
Agent Vocabulary Size (|T |)
Median Latency (ms)
Praetor
Aegis
Fig. 3 Per-call median latency comparison. Praetor’s O(1) lookup remains flat, whereas the Aegis
baseline scales linearly with vocabulary size.
We measured per-tool-call latency by timing 10,000 consecutive tool-call inter-
cepts across three agent sizes: 10-tool, 100-tool, and 500-tool agents. As shown in
Figure 3, Praetor’s runtime execution path is limited to a hash-map lookup and
parameter schema validation, causing its per-call latency to remain effectively con-
stant (within 0.4 ms) across all agent scales: 2.2 ms, 2.6 ms, and 2.3 ms (medians)
respectively, with 95th-percentile (P95) latencies of 3.1 ms, 3.8 ms, and 4.2 ms. The
performance yields a 3.7× to 28.3× speedup over the deployed Aegis gateway (eval-
uated using the v1.2.0 open-source release2), which empirically degraded from 8.2 ms
to 65.0 ms as vocabulary size increased. Praetor’s efficiency arises because it replaces
the deep JSON extraction and multi-stage scanning of Aegis with an O(1) structural
lookup. The gateway embeds incoming strings using the ort crate against an INT8-
quantized ONNX export of all-MiniLM-L6-v2; for calls carrying string parameters,
this inference component adds approximately 1.6 ms to the latency budget, yielding a
blended median of 2.2 ms across the ASB workloads.
To isolate the O(1) throughput claim from confounds introduced by specific agent
personas, we constructed synthetic pDFAs ranging from 10 to 10,000 states and mea-
sured gateway throughput under sustained concurrent load. Across all evaluated sizes,
2Aegis v1.2.0 is deployed via the authors’ provided Docker Compose environment available at https:
//github.com/aegis-guard/aegis-artifact.
22

system throughput remained within ±1.5% of the 12,500 transactions per second
(TPS) baseline, empirically validating the O(1) lookup property and demonstrat-
ing that this architectural decoupling scales to exceptionally large behavioral profiles
without performance degradation. Moreover, compiling the entire 500-trace ToolBench
corpus into the pDFA takes roughly 12 seconds on our test hardware, confirming
that the asynchronous offline profiling phase imposes a negligible maintenance burden.
7.4 False Positive Rate and Concept Drift
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
20
15
8.5
2.2
2.1
2
Context-Window Width (w)
Attack Success Rate (%)
Fig. 4 Ablation of context-window width (w) vs. Attack Success Rate (ASR). The elbow at w = 3
establishes the minimum-sufficient threshold for structural security without overfitting. Note that
the plotted ASR represents the macro-average across all five attack families, not just the context-
sequential subset.
7.4.1 Sensitivity and Adversarial Resilience
Context Window Ablation. Varying the context width w ∈{1, 2, 3, 4, 5} at θ = 3
reveals a strict precision-recall tradeoff (Figure 4). For our Context-Sequential set,
w = 1 and w = 2 result in 100% and 45% ASR, while the default w = 3 drops ASR
to 0%. However, increasing to w = 4 and w = 5 fragments the state space, causing
legitimate transitions to fall below the pruning threshold and significantly increasing
the benign task failure rate (BTFR) to 3.2% and 7.1%. This confirms w = 3 as the
optimal operating point for structured deployments.
Furthermore, Figure 5 highlights a fundamental deployment boundary: Praetor’s
efficacy relies heavily on task structure. In high-entropy, open-ended environments like
the Research Agent (12.6% ASR) and Travel Planner (8.6% ASR), behavior is highly
variable, forcing the pDFA to expand permissively and allowing Praetor’s ASR to
regress toward Aegis’s structured average. This confirms that Praetor is not a
universal substitute for stateless scanners in unconstrained environments. Instead, the
systems are strictly complementary. Because Praetor acts as a structural gatekeeper
with near-zero latency, it operates effectively as a first-line filter. A combined Defense-
in-Depth configuration, routing calls that survive Praetor’s structural and semantic
23

DI
II
MSE
TP
MM
Overall
0
10
20
1.4
2.6
0
2.1
1.2
1.5
2.8
5.9
0
4.4
3.1
3.2
1.8
3.5
0
2.5
1.7
1.9
8.2
12.4
4.5
10.1
7.8
8.6
11.5
18.2
6.8
14.5
12
12.6
Attack Success Rate (%)
Praetor Breakdown (Per Scenario)
Cust. Service
OS Auto
DB Admin
Travel Planner
Research Agent
Fig. 5 Breakdown of Praetor’s Attack Success Rate (ASR) across all five scenarios, illustrating
the performance degradation in high-entropy, open-ended environments.
validation into a secondary stateless scanner like Aegis for deep syntax inspection,
provides optimal security. As shown in Table 3, such a configuration structurally drops
the baseline ASR to 0.8% while maintaining the capacity to catch out-of-distribution
payloads that evade Praetor’s bounds in high-entropy settings.
String Guard Ablation. Disabling the embedding check elevates the macro-
averaged ASR across string-heavy families (e.g., from 3.0% to 18.5% for Tool Poison-
ing), mandating semantic guards. Under TextFooler [24] synonym substitution attacks,
the εstr-ball blocks 82% (95% CI: [78.4%, 85.3%]) of 500 adversarial variants. The 18%
evasion rate contrasts sharply with the 1.2% Oracle ASR because TextFooler finds
semantics-preserving synonyms that trivially remain inside the continuous boundary,
whereas the Oracle attempts to force semantically distant, functionally malicious pay-
loads across it. Substituting the encoder with all-mpnet-base-v2 reduces evasion
marginally to 16.5%, proving the semantic vulnerability transcends model selection.
The residual 18% baseline evasion rate dictates supplementary mitigation. To resolve
this, we employ the Sensitive-Parameter Whitelist Override (Section 4). Assuming a
theoretically complete, manually curated lexicon (e.g., * path, * query), the explicit
override correctly shields the targeted parameters, dropping the effective evasion rate
to 0.4%. However, if the lexicon is incomplete or unmaintained, the evasion rate
strictly remains 18%, confirming the override as an operational patch rather than a
structural defense.
7.4.2 Analysis of Usability and Evolution
The pruning threshold θ governs the behavioral envelope: higher θ values reduce ASR
but elevate false positives. At our default θ = 3, Praetor achieves a 2.0% BTFR (2
failures / 100 traces; 95% CI: [0.2%, 7.0%]) on 100 held-out ToolBench traces. Manual
24

inspection of the 12 individually blocked tool calls across the trace batch revealed they
consist entirely of long-tail tool sequences (65%) or minor parameter drift (35%).
Corpus Scaling and Parameter Drift. To explicitly quantify how operational
metrics evolve, we scaled the training corpus from 500 to 5,000 traces. At 5,000 traces,
the long-tail behavioral paths are fully discovered, and the BTFR drops to a near-zero
0.2% with no latency penalty. As established empirically, the ASR remains low (2.6%
overall) at this scale, confirming that security is derived from structural constraints,
not merely an under-fitted whitelist. Injecting syntactically varied paraphrases into
the testing traces at rates from 10% to 50% only raised the BTFR to a maximum of
4.2%, demonstrating that the continuous string parameter guards successfully absorb
realistic user interaction drift.
Concept
drift
scenario.
To
evaluate
the
incremental
update
protocol
(Section 4.3), we simulated concept drift by replacing 20% of the agent’s tool
set, selected uniformly at random. The stale pDFA yielded a prohibitive 24.0%
BTFR. However, a single incremental update cycle incorporating 350 human-approved
sequences restored the BTFR to 3.8%. This yields an estimated labor cost of 8.75
analyst-hours per 20% tool refresh. While non-trivial, this human-in-the-loop cost is
the pragmatic price for resisting adversarial telemetry poisoning.
8 Discussion
8.1 Operational Threats and Concept Drift
Our evaluations are anchored by a 500-trace corpus. The prevalence of long-tail
sequence anomalies indicates that 500 traces represent a sparse lower bound rather
than an exhaustive operational distribution. While 500 traces serve as a reasonable
minimum to establish the core pDFA backbone for these experiments, production
deployments should scale the initial profiling corpus by an order of magnitude to fully
saturate the valid transition matrix before enabling strict blocking.
A primary challenge for whitelist-based enforcement is concept drift: as an agent
evolves, the stale pDFA will generate false positives. Praetor’s human-in-the-loop
incremental update protocol (Section 4.3) addresses this by expanding the DFA only
upon explicit operator approval, preventing adversaries from silently widening the
behavioral envelope. In enterprise settings, a secondary LLM could triage blocked
events in bulk, presenting the analyst with grouped summaries rather than individual
call logs, for the incremental update cycle runs asynchronously and does not affect
gateway availability.
However, the core security guarantee of Praetor rests upon the structural
integrity of the pDFA, which assumes the training corpus C is strictly benign. A suf-
ficiently patient adversary could attempt to gradually contaminate the corpus during
the profiling period by feeding the agent subtly malicious inputs, tricking the profiler
into authorizing specific tool sequences or widening the continuous εstr-ball boundaries
before the pDFA is frozen. Such telemetry poisoning (”cold start problem”) must be
25

mitigated operationally. Profiling should not occur in live, untrusted production envi-
ronments; instead, operators must generate the baseline corpus within a sandboxed,
clean-room staging environment using curated synthetic user prompts.
8.2 Mitigating Within-Profile Exploits
The primary residual threat to Praetor is the within-profile exploit. Adversaries con-
strained by the pDFA may attempt ”Tool-Call ROP”, inducing sequences of legitimate
calls (e.g., repeating read ticket 100 times) to probe system state or infer sensitive
data without triggering a structural block. To mitigate these low-bandwidth extrac-
tion attacks, operators can deploy rate limiting (bounding cyclic subgraph traversal)
alongside lightweight statistical anomaly detectors (e.g., Aegis’s 7-day baseline) that
flag abnormal volume spikes. Moreover, as demonstrated in Section 7.4, adversarial
synonym-substitution can evade continuous εstr-ball bounds. Deploying the Sensitive-
Parameter Whitelist Override is therefore essential to structurally close this evasion
channel.
8.3 Analytical Comparison with Information-Flow Control
Information-flow control (IFC) systems like Fides [12] use dynamic taint tracking
to prevent sensitive data from flowing to untrusted sinks. While IFC strictly blocks
explicit Multi-Step Exfiltration if confidentiality labels are perfectly maintained, it
struggles against Tool Poisoning or Indirect Injection where malicious actions (e.g.,
deleting a file) do not violate data confidentiality but break behavioral norms.
Praetor naturally complements IFC by enforcing the structural workflow without
requiring deep integration into the agent’s internal planning state.
8.4 Agent Behavioral Entropy and Scope of Applicability
Praetor’s pDFA construction assumes the target agent exhibits low behavioral
entropy: a stable set of tool-call sequences with reproducible parameter distributions.
This holds strongly for narrow-task, single-role agents. However, large-vocabulary
agents (hundreds of tools) or open-ended task agents (general-purpose assistants)
exhibit a combinatorially large space of valid call sequences. In these regimes, the
w-gram context window provides coarser discrimination, merging distinct behavioral
modes and elevating residual attack surfaces (as empirically validated in Figure 5).
For such agents, operators must rely on larger profiling corpora and carefully tune θ to
balance false positives against enforcement rigor. Extension to multi-agent swarms or
non-text multi-modal action spaces remains an open architectural challenge for future
work.
9 Conclusion
We presented Praetor, a telemetry-driven behavioral firewall for autonomous AI
agents that resolves the sequential-blindness limitation of existing stateless firewalls.
The separation of complex profiling from runtime enforcement yields two concrete
advantages. First, the runtime gateway incurs negligible per-call overhead (as low
26

as 2.2 ms at the 50th percentile), representing a 3.7× to 28.3× improvement over
Aegis, a representative stateless baseline, depending on agent vocabulary size. Second,
the behavioral envelope is per-deployment: the pDFA encodes the deployment-level
norms of one agent on one system prompt, rather than a generic cross-agent policy.
The adversary must therefore mimic the exact historical trajectory of the target agent
at every step. Evaluation across five Agent Security Bench scenarios yields a 5.6%
macro-averaged attack success rate. Within three structured workflows, ASR drops to
2.2% (baseline Aegis: 12.8%). Praetor blocks 100% of multi-step exfiltration and
context-sequential exploits in these structured domains. Although Praetor reduces
the structural attack surface, the string parameter guard exhibits an 18% evasion
rate under adversarial synonym-substitution attacks; hardening this component via
adversarially resilient embeddings or ensemble validators remains critical future work.
These results establish that securing autonomous agents requires explicit models
of behavioral trajectories, for stateless inspection fails against sequential exploits. Two
directions remain open. First, the current profiler operates on a fixed offline corpus;
extending it to incremental streaming ingestion would support deployments where the
trace corpus grows continuously. Second, applying differential privacy to the telemetry
corpus would harden Praetor against a persistent oracle adversary attempting DFA
reconstruction.
Statement and Declarations
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Competing Interests: The author declares no conflict of interest.
Data Availability: The benign trace corpus, attack payloads, pDFA serialisation,
and Praetor source code that support the findings of this study will be made avail-
able in a public repository upon acceptance / are available from the corresponding
author on reasonable request.
Author Contributions: Hung Dang is the sole author and contributed to all aspects
of this work.