ClawCoin: An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for
Decentralized Agent Economies
Shaoyu Li
shaoyuli@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
Virginia, USA
Chaoyu Zhang
chaoyu@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
Virginia, USA
Hexuan Yu
hexuanyu@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
Virginia, USA
Y. Thomas Hou
thou@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
Virginia, USA
Wenjing Lou
wjlou@vt.edu
Virginia Tech
Virginia, USA
Abstract
Autonomous AI agents live or die by the API tokens they consume:
without paid inference capacity they cannot reason, act, or delegate.
This compute-token cost has become the binding resource of the
emerging agent economy, yet it is structurally non-transferable: it
is account-bound, vendor-specific, and absent from any on-chain
ledger. Recent agent payment rails such as x402 and agent-to-agent
wire formats move fiat-backed value between agents, but they do
not represent the quantity agents actually burn. The result is a
substrate where agents can transport purchasing power but can-
not quote, escrow, or settle workflows in a unit aligned with their
dominant cost.
We present ClawCoin, a tokenized, compute-cost-indexed unit
of account and settlement asset for decentralized agent economies.
ClawCoin turns the non-transferable cost of compute into a portable,
composable, contract-readable primitive through four layers: (i) a
robust basket index over standardized (model, vendor) prices, with
smoothing and bounded per-epoch drift; (ii) an oracle that pub-
lishes signed, fresh attestations under an explicit trust model; (iii) a
NAV-based mint/redeem vault with coverage thresholds, rate limits,
and auto-pause; and (iv) an on-chain settlement layer that atomi-
cally clears multi-hop agent delegations against compute-aligned
budgets. We formalize the adversary, state bounded guarantees for
index integrity, NAV faithfulness, redeemability under stress, and
liveness, and walk through the principal attack scenarios.
We implement a prototype on an Ethereum-compatible L2 and
evaluate it using a multi-agent simulator and the OpenClaw testbed,
a six-role containerized agent system that shares one inference
endpoint across settlement backends. Across single-agent, multi-
agent, workflow, and resource-procurement experiments, ClawCoin
stabilizes execution capacity under cost shocks, collapses cross-
agent quote dispersion, eliminates partial settlements in multi-hop
delegation, and sustains cooperative market dynamics that fiat-
denominated baselines cannot. Risk sanity checks confirm that the
vault’s staleness, drift, and coverage defenses behave as specified.
The results argue that a security-engineered, compute-indexed unit
of account is the missing representation primitive for decentralized
agent coordination.
1
Introduction
Tokens are the lifeblood of an autonomous AI agent. Every plan an
agent makes, every tool it calls, and every subtask it delegates is paid
for in model and API tokens. Without them, an agent cannot think
and cannot act. This is not a metaphor: the industry has converged
on tokens as the literal unit in which agent work is priced and
budgeted. NVIDIA now frames data centers as “token factories” and
tokens-per-watt as a CEO-level KPI [29, 30]; major AI organizations
measure engineer productivity in tokens consumed and grant token
budgets as compensation [37]; analysts forecast token sales as the
dominant revenue line of frontier AI infrastructure [30]. The agent
economy already has a value anchor, namely the cost of the API
tokens that keep agents alive, and that anchor is rapidly becoming
the unit in which the rest of the AI industry is measured.
And yet that anchor is not on-chain, not transferable, and
not tradable. API tokens are account-bound: inference quotas
cannot be handed between agents, subscriptions cannot be subdi-
vided across delegated subtasks, and prepaid balances cannot cross
vendors. The payment side has moved in the opposite direction.
Coinbase’s x402 [42] has wired stablecoin settlement directly into
HTTP and processed millions of agent-to-agent transactions within
months of launch [43]; agent-to-agent wire formats [1] and agent-
payment platforms [2, 12] are following close behind. The rails for
agent-native commerce now exist. What does not exist is an agent-
native unit of value to move on those rails. Stablecoins [10, 26]
efficiently transport fiat purchasing power but say nothing about
the resource that actually constrains an agent, namely the compute
it must burn to keep operating. Stablecoins solve transport. They do
not solve representation: in what unit should an agent quote, budget,
escrow, and settle, when its dominant recurring cost is compute?
This paper therefore takes the next step: if tokens are
the value anchor, tokenize them. We tokenize the compute-
cost surface itself by publishing an on-chain, transparent index
of what it costs to operate the models agents actually use, and
minting a token whose net asset value (NAV) tracks that index.
Once the anchor is on-chain, the key properties follow: agents read
the same NAV, so quotes are directly comparable in compute units;
smart contracts can escrow, route, and rate-limit settlement against
compute-aligned budgets that the contracts themselves can verify;
multi-hop delegation chains can settle atomically against a single
shared numeraire; and because the token is a redeemable claim
against a transparent reserve, the value the agent moves is the
value the agent burns.
A natural alternative is to keep settlement in fiat-backed sta-
blecoins and ask each agent to maintain a private internal cost
index. This breaks down in decentralized settings. Per-agent in-
dices are not a shared numeraire, so quotes from different agents
cannot be compared without trusted middleware; internal account-
ing cannot be referenced inside smart contracts, so multi-hop del-
egation cannot be atomically constrained by a compute-aligned
budget; and opaque per-agent indices are not auditable or compos-
able with other on-chain primitives. A genuinely shared numeraire
for compute-bound agents has to live on-chain.
arXiv:2604.19026v1 [cs.MA] 21 Apr 2026

Li et al.
We present ClawCoin, a collateral-backed, index-linked tok-
enized unit of account and settlement asset. ClawCoin is delib-
erately not a generic stablecoin, a speculative asset, or a direct
claim on physical compute: it is a redeemable financial claim whose
NAV tracks a transparent compute cost basket and whose token
form supplies the portability, composability, and atomic settlement
properties that private accounting cannot. The economic intuition
is closer to an index-linked note (an inflation-protected claim track-
ing a published basket) than to a fiat peg; the systems intuition is
that exposing a compute-aligned unit at the smart-contract layer
lets agents quote, escrow, delegate, and settle in the unit their oper-
ations actually consume.
Realizing this in a decentralized, adversarial environment is non-
trivial. Prices are observed through heterogeneous vendor schedules
with hidden discounts and the possibility of strategic repricing once
inclusion becomes economically meaningful. The on-chain index
feeds mint/redeem logic, so any oracle compromise propagates into
the value of every outstanding token. NAV-based semantics shift
reserve liabilities upward whenever the index rises, exposing the
vault to redemption stress. And the settlement layer is itself a target
for maximal extractable value (MEV) around oracle updates and for
governance capture. A credible design must make its threat model,
trust assumptions, and security properties explicit.
Contributions. In summary, this paper makes the following
contributions:
• The representation argument. We articulate the value-anchor
argument for the agent economy (API tokens are what
agents must consume to exist, so the unit of account should
track that cost) and show that internal indexing over sta-
blecoin rails cannot supply this primitive in decentralized
coordination.
• Protocol design. We design a four-layer protocol: a robust
basket index with bounded per-epoch drift, a committee
or DON oracle with signed attestations, a NAV-based mint
or redeem vault with reserve coverage and rate-limit risk
controls, and an on-chain atomic multi-hop settlement layer.
The protocol is specified as two compact algorithms.
• Security analysis. Against a bounded adversary controlling
a vendor minority, an oracle minority, mint/redeem-time
MEV, and governance proposals, we state bounded guar-
antees for index integrity, NAV faithfulness, redeemability
under stress, and liveness, and walk through the principal
attack scenarios.
• Prototype and evaluation. We implement ClawCoin on an
Ethereum-compatible L2, build a multi-agent simulator, and
deploy a six-role containerized agent testbed (OpenClaw) in
which the same workflow executes under three settlement
backends. Results across single-agent stability, cross-agent
coordination, multi-hop workflows, long-horizon economy
survival, and external resource procurement show that
ClawCoin dominates fiat and internal-indexing baselines
on every axis that cross-agent coordination exposes.
The broader claim is simple: the agent economy already has a
value anchor and is rapidly acquiring payment rails on which agents
can trade. What is missing is the bridge between them: an on-chain,
tokenized representation of that anchor that agents can actually
move, escrow, and settle in. ClawCoin is a concrete, decentralized,
and security-engineered step toward that bridge.
2
Background and Related Work
ClawCoin sits at the intersection of agent-economy infrastructure,
stablecoin and oracle systems, tokenized index-linked claims, and
decentralized multi-agent coordination.
2.1
Agent Economies and Multi-Agent
Coordination
Recent work argues that autonomous software will increasingly
need wallets, identities, and machine-to-machine settlement to act
as economic participants [35, 44]. Payment specifications such as
x402 [42] and A2A [1] standardize quote and pay primitives at the
application layer, and multi-agent frameworks [23, 31, 41] provide
the orchestration substrate on top of which compute-aligned settle-
ment is needed. Compute-resource markets such as Akash [3], File-
coin [17], and Bittensor [5] tokenize a related but distinct quantity,
namely supply of physical compute or storage. AI-adjacent tokens
used for access, governance, or emissions bootstrap participation
but, absent an external anchor, do not provide a cost-grounded
shared numeraire. This literature answers the transport question.
ClawCoin addresses the orthogonal representation question: in what
unit should compute-bound budgets, prices, and treasuries be de-
nominated when settlement is decentralized.
2.2
Stablecoins, Index-Linked Claims, and
Tokenized RWAs
The stablecoin literature analyzes reserve quality, arbitrage de-
sign, and peg fragility under stress [10, 20, 26]. The Terra/UST col-
lapse [11, 25], Iron Finance’s death spiral [22], and the 2023 USDC
depeg [39] show that algorithmic stabilization and reserve-custody
exposure can cascade catastrophically; these episodes motivate
ClawCoin’s transparent collateral-backed structure with explicit
risk controls over a purely algorithmic peg.
Classical work on index-linked securities [19] and inflation-
protected sovereign bonds (TIPS [36]) show that basket-based in-
struments can carry meaningful claims without a single nominal
peg. ETF arbitrage [32] is the closest financial analogy to Claw-
Coin’s mint/redeem pricing, and tokenized real-world asset de-
signs [6, 18] demonstrate on-chain claims whose value derives
from external indices. ClawCoin adapts this design family to a new
reference, namely a basket of standardized inference costs, and
supplies the systems-security machinery required when that basket
is published by an oracle protocol rather than tracked by traditional
custodians.
2.3
Oracles, MEV, and DeFi Risk Controls
Oracle networks [7, 33, 38] convert off-chain observations into on-
chain references under threshold-committee or optimistic-dispute
trust models. Oracle compromise is one of the most consequential
DeFi attack surfaces: Mango [28], Cream [13], bZx [8], and Har-
vest [21] all suffered manipulation-driven losses, and surveys [9, 15]
catalog the standard defenses (multi-source aggregation, smoothing,

ClawCoin : An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for Decentralized Agent Economies
deviation thresholds, freshness gates) that directly inform Claw-
Coin’s index pipeline (Section 4).
The broader DeFi literature [40, 45] surveys collateral, liquidity,
and risk-control patterns; MEV analyses [14, 34] motivate Claw-
Coin’s per-epoch caps and drift bounds; and mature protocols [24,
27] expose the rate-limit and pause patterns that ClawCoin’s risk
module adapts to an index-linked NAV in which liabilities are them-
selves dynamic. Governance attacks [4, 16] motivate the narrow,
timelocked governance surface.
2.4
Positioning
Table 1 situates ClawCoin among adjacent system categories. The
novelty is not a new payment rail, not a new utility token, and not
a new compute auction. It is a security-engineered, on-chain, index-
linked unit of account that closes the representation gap between
machine-native cost and decentralized agent settlement.
3
System Model, Threat Model, and Design
Overview
3.1
Economic Setting
We consider a population of autonomous agents that continuously
request, execute, and settle compute-intensive tasks. Each agent
acts as both service consumer and producer, and may delegate
subtasks along multi-hop chains that must settle as a single co-
herent workflow. The defining feature of this economy is what
participants must spend to keep existing: API tokens consumed for
model inference and metered tool invocations. An agent without a
paid-up token budget cannot reason, cannot act, and is for practical
purposes offline. That cost is the natural value anchor of the agent
economy.
Formally, each agent 𝑖maintains a treasury 𝑇𝑖,𝑡denominated in
the prevailing accounting unit, evolving as
𝑇𝑖,𝑡+1 = 𝑇𝑖,𝑡+ 𝑅𝑖,𝑡−𝐾𝑖,𝑡,
(1)
with revenue 𝑅𝑖,𝑡and operating cost 𝐾𝑖,𝑡. Equation 1 is identical
across regimes; what differs is the informational content of 𝑇𝑖,𝑡
once a unit is fixed. Define execution capacity 𝐸𝑖,𝑡as the amount
of standardized computational work a treasury can fund. Under
fiat denomination, 𝐸𝑖,𝑡depends on both 𝑇𝑖,𝑡and the time-varying
compute price, so the same nominal balance corresponds to dif-
ferent amounts of executable work over time. The system goal of
ClawCoin is to make execution capacity a stable, observable, and
contract-readable quantity.
3.2
Why Tokenization Is Necessary
The argument has two steps, both required. First, anchor the unit
to what agents consume: a unit of account that agents quote, es-
crow, and settle in should track the cost that determines whether
they can keep operating. Fiat purchasing power does not; the same
USDC balance buys different amounts of inference over time, and no
contract-level check can assert “this escrow funds the workflow” as
compute prices move. Second, put the anchor on a tradable on-chain
rail. API tokens are account-bound and non-transferable; private
internal indices are invisible to counterparties and smart contracts.
To obtain the properties that justify the design (shared numeraire,
atomic multi-hop settlement, contract-enforced compute-aligned
budgets, and auditability), the anchor must be wrapped as a tok-
enized claim living in the same composable substrate (x402 [42],
A2A [1]) on which agents already transact.
Three baselines make the argument concrete. (A) Per-agent inter-
nal indexing with USDC settlement: each agent computes its own cost
index privately and converts at pay time. This performs Step 1 pri-
vately but skips Step 2 entirely; quotes from heterogeneous agents
are incomparable without trusted middleware, smart contracts can-
not enforce compute-aligned budgets, and multi-hop chains cannot
atomically commit against a shared budget. (B) Centralized account-
ing service: a trusted operator publishes indices and settles off-chain,
introducing a single point of failure for liveness, censorship, and
bookkeeping; it performs Step 1 publicly but only partially real-
izes Step 2. (C) On-chain index-linked tokenized claim (ClawCoin):
the index is published on-chain by an oracle protocol, and a token
whose NAV is defined by the index routes through standard transfer
logic. All agents read the same NAV, quotes are directly comparable,
delegation chains settle as a single atomic transaction, and index
updates, mint/redeem, and reserve state are observable, with risk
controls enforced by code. This is the only baseline that performs
both steps. We do not claim tokenization is the only design that ex-
poses a compute-aligned unit; we claim it is the minimal primitive
that simultaneously provides a shared numeraire, composability,
atomic multi-hop settlement, and auditability when no common
operator is trusted.
3.3
Threat Model
Participants. An oracle protocol (either a 𝑘-of-𝑛threshold com-
mittee or a decentralized oracle network, DON) publishes the index
on-chain; a vault contract holds reserve collateral and exposes mint
and redeem; a risk-control module enforces coverage, throttles,
drift caps, and pause logic; governance updates the basket, vendor
registry, and parameters under timelock; agents quote, transact,
and settle in ClawCoin.
Adversary. A polynomial-time A may: control up to 𝑓of 𝑛ven-
dor price endpoints (biased, stale, or withheld); compromise a strict
minority of the oracle committee or, under the DON model, fewer
reporters than the safety threshold; reorder, sandwich, or front-
run mint/redeem around oracle updates (MEV); submit governance
proposals subject to voting and timelock; act as a strategic vendor
adjusting public prices in response to basket inclusion; and trig-
ger redemption rushes through multiple identities up to available
liquidity.
Trust assumptions. We assume an honest oracle threshold; a
censorship-resistant base chain with bounded confirmation delay;
at least 𝑛−𝑓honest vendor endpoints with non-adversarial public
postings; safe cryptographic primitives; and timelock and quorum
rules that the adversary alone cannot bypass. Out of scope: physical
compromise causing all vendors to collude on the same biased
price; correlated regulatory shutdown of reserve custodians; base-
chain bugs or 51% attacks; off-chain leakage of nonpublic enterprise
pricing.
Security goals. We target four properties, formalized in Sec-
tion 5. G1. Index integrity: the published index ¯𝐼𝑡deviates from
the honest index by an amount bounded by the adversary’s vendor
share 𝑓/𝑛and the chosen robust estimator. G2. NAV faithfulness:

Li et al.
Table 1: Positioning ClawCoin relative to adjacent system categories. The right-most column explains why each category does
not supply the compute-aligned, contract-readable unit of account that ClawCoin targets for decentralized agent coordination.
Category
Primary function
Typical value anchor
Trust model
Why not equivalent to Claw-
Coin
Agent payment rail [1, 42]
Move value between agents
and services
Fiat-backed collateral or net-
work token
Stablecoin issuer or chain
consensus
Solves transport, not the
unit of account; no compute-
aligned representation.
Utility token [5]
Gate access, staking, gover-
nance within a platform
Floating
ecosystem-token
market value
Platform operator + market
No external cost grounding;
no shared numeraire across
providers.
Fiat stablecoin [10, 20]
Low-volatility
settlement
against fiat
1 USD peg
Issuer reserves + audits
Anchored to human purchas-
ing power; not aligned with
machine cost.
Tokenized RWA [6, 18]
On-chain claim on external
asset / index
External asset / index
Issuer custody + oracle
Same financial family; Claw-
Coin specializes the index to
compute and adds the ora-
cle and risk modules of Sec-
tion 4.
Compute market token [3,
17]
Price physical compute sup-
ply
Auction or staking
Provider network
Prices supply, not the cost
agents pay; no shared cost
numeraire.
ClawCoin
Quote,
budget,
settle
in
machine-native unit; atomic
multi-hop settlement
Basket of standardized com-
pute costs
Oracle protocol + collateral
vault + risk module
Targets
compute-aligned
operating cost with explicit
security
properties
(G1)
through (G4) for decentral-
ized agent coordination.
the on-chain NAV deviates from the honest NAV by an amount
bounded by staleness, smoothing, and the per-epoch drift cap. G3.
Redeemability under stress: for index trajectories with per-epoch
growth bounded by 𝛿max, reserve coverage Γ𝑡remains above 𝛾min
for at least𝑇epochs under replenishment rate 𝜌. G4. Liveness and
freshness: honest updates are confirmed within bounded delay 𝜏
and consumers can detect violations and trigger fallbacks. We treat
ClawCoin as a security-engineered substrate; full game-theoretic
equilibrium properties are not targeted.
3.4
Design Overview
ClawCoin realizes both steps of Section 3.2 in five components
separated by an explicit off-chain/on-chain trust boundary. Vendor
data sources expose public prices for included (model, vendor) pairs.
The off-chain index calculator fetches, validates, and aggregates
observations into a basket value, applies smoothing and a per-epoch
drift cap, and produces a signed attestation. The on-chain oracle
publishes the attested value with timestamp, basket version, and
a Merkle commitment to the underlying observations, enforcing
freshness and writer authentication. The token and vault maintain
supply, mint, and redeem against reserve collateral at the current
NAV, and expose standard transfer semantics. The risk-control and
governance module enforces coverage, mint throttling, auto-pause,
drift caps, and basket/parameter updates under timelock. The chain
verifies that a published value comes from an authorized oracle; its
validity with respect to honest market prices depends on observable
off-chain data and the published basket configuration. Section 4
makes each layer concrete; Section 5 states the security properties;
Sections 6 through 7 evaluate the prototype, simulator, and the
OpenClaw testbed.
4
ClawCoin Protocol Design
The design realizes the two-step argument of Section 3.2 as four
protocol layers. (i) The cost index anchors the unit to the API-token
costs that determine whether agents can keep operating; it is ro-
bust to adversarial vendor minorities and bounded in per-epoch
movement. (ii) The oracle carries that anchor across the trust bound-
ary onto the chain, with signed attestation, freshness, and writer
authentication. (iii) The NAV-based vault turns the anchor into a
redeemable, transferable token, with coverage thresholds and rate-
limit controls protecting holders. (iv) The settlement layer exposes
the property that justifies tokenization: agents quote, escrow, and
atomically settle multi-hop delegations in the unit their operations
consume, inside the same composable substrate as existing agent
payment rails. Two algorithms summarize the protocol: Algorithm 1
for index publication and Algorithm 2 for vault state-changing op-
erations.
Notation. 𝑀is the set of included models and𝑉(𝑚) the vendors
offering model 𝑚. 𝐾= {(𝛼𝑘, 𝛽𝑘,𝜃𝑘)}|𝐾|
𝑘=1 is a vector of standardized
workload classes with normalized input/output token counts 𝛼𝑘, 𝛽𝑘
and basket-level weights 𝜃𝑘≥0 summing to one. Vendors expose
per-token input and output prices 𝑃in
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡and 𝑃out
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡. We write ¯𝐼𝑡
for the smoothed, drift-capped index published on-chain, 𝐼0 for its
initialization, and NAV𝑡= ¯𝐼𝑡/𝐼0. Reserves are denominated in a
fiat-backed collateral such as USDC.
4.1
Cost Index Construction
The index is a basket built in three stages: per-(model, vendor) cost
over standardized workloads, robust per-model aggregation across

ClawCoin : An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for Decentralized Agent Economies
vendors, and a weighted basket smoothed and drift-capped before
publication.
Standardized workloads. Modern inference is priced by input
and output tokens, but real workloads have heterogeneous shapes.
We maintain a vector of workload classes and treat 𝜃𝑘as a basket
mix. A class-𝑘request on (𝑚, 𝑣) has nominal cost𝐶(𝑘)
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡= 𝛼𝑘𝑃in
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡+
𝛽𝑘𝑃out
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡, and the per-pair basket-aware cost aggregates the mix:
𝐶𝑚,𝑣,𝑡=
|𝐾|
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝜃𝑘
 𝛼𝑘𝑃in
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡+ 𝛽𝑘𝑃out
𝑚,𝑣,𝑡
.
(2)
Because 𝜃𝑘is a public governance parameter, the workload assump-
tion is auditable and explicitly versioned.
Robust per-model aggregation. A model is offered by multiple
vendors at prices that differ across backends, contracts, and promo-
tions. Let C𝑚,𝑡= {𝐶𝑚,𝑣,𝑡}𝑣∈𝑉(𝑚) and 𝑛𝑚= |C𝑚,𝑡|. The per-model
robust cost ˜𝐶𝑚,𝑡is selected by governance:
˜𝐶med
𝑚,𝑡= median(C𝑚,𝑡),
(3)
˜𝐶trim(𝑞)
𝑚,𝑡
= trimmedMean𝑞(C𝑚,𝑡),
(4)
˜𝐶mad
𝑚,𝑡= mean

𝑐∈C𝑚,𝑡: |𝑐−median(C𝑚,𝑡)| ≤𝜅· MAD(C𝑚,𝑡)
 
,
(5)
where MAD denotes the median absolute deviation. The default
is the median: its 50% breakdown point yields the clean integrity
bound of Section 5.1, so the worst-case deviation under 𝑓< 𝑛𝑚/2
adversarial vendors is determined by the spread of honest reports
rather than by adversarial values. Trimmed mean trades robustness
(𝑞breakdown) for variance reduction; MAD-filtered mean retains
50% breakdown with tighter variance. Any model with 𝑛𝑚< 𝑛min
is dropped for that epoch.
Cross-model basket and bounded publication. With basket
weights 𝑤𝑚≥0, Í
𝑚𝑤𝑚= 1, the raw index 𝐼𝑡= Í
𝑚∈𝑀𝑤𝑚˜𝐶𝑚,𝑡is a
compute analog of a price-weighted equity index; usage-weighted
variants 𝑤𝑚∝𝑢𝑚give capitalization-style analogs with the stan-
dard stability and responsiveness trade-off. We then apply an expo-
nential moving average (EMA) and clip per-epoch movement:
ˆ𝐼𝑡= 𝜆¯𝐼𝑡−1+(1−𝜆)𝐼𝑡,
¯𝐼𝑡= clip ˆ𝐼𝑡, (1−𝛿max)¯𝐼𝑡−1, (1+𝛿max)¯𝐼𝑡−1
.
(6)
𝜆controls convergence speed and 𝛿max bounds per-epoch move-
ment; clipped excess is absorbed in later epochs. These knobs mirror
the rate-limit pattern of mature stablecoin and lending protocols,
give the risk module a known upper bound on liability growth
(used in Theorem 1), and define the publication channel that the
on-chain oracle additionally enforces as defense-in-depth (Algo-
rithm 1). The index tracks inference cost rather than model quality:
embedding quality would require a continuously updated cross-
domain notion of task utility and would create governance disputes
over benchmark choice. We separate measurement from differenti-
ation; quality is priced in markets through reputation, contracting,
and observed outcomes.
4.2
Oracle Protocol
The oracle separates off-chain index computation from on-chain
publication. Only the publication step is trusted by contracts; the
Algorithm 1 IndexPublication: off-chain computation and on-
chain publication at epoch 𝑡.
Require: basket 𝑀, vendor sets {𝑉(𝑚)}, workload classes 𝐾,
weights {𝑤𝑚}, smoothing 𝜆, drift cap 𝛿max, robust estimator
Agg, prior ¯𝐼𝑡−1, trust model T ∈{committee, DON}, threshold
𝑘, max staleness 𝜏
// off-chain pipeline (each oracle node)
1: 𝑀★←∅
2: for each model 𝑚∈𝑀do
3:
C𝑚,𝑡←{𝐶𝑚,𝑣,𝑡: 𝑣∈𝑉(𝑚), fetch valid and not stale}
⊲
eq. 2
4:
if |C𝑚,𝑡| ≥𝑛min then
5:
˜𝐶𝑚,𝑡←Agg(C𝑚,𝑡); 𝑀★←𝑀★∪{𝑚}
6:
end if
7: end for
8: renormalize {𝑤𝑚}𝑚∈𝑀★to sum to one
9: 𝐼𝑡←Í
𝑚∈𝑀★𝑤𝑚˜𝐶𝑚,𝑡; compute ¯𝐼𝑡via eq. 6
10: emit attestation 𝜎𝑡= (¯𝐼𝑡,𝑡, basketVersion,ℎ𝑡, nodeId, sig)
// on-chain publication
11: if T = committee then
12:
combine 𝑘
matching
attestations
into 𝜎★
𝑡;
submit
(¯𝐼𝑡,𝑡, basketVersion,ℎ𝑡, 𝜎★
𝑡)
13: else
14:
reporters submit 𝜎(𝑗)
𝑡
; aggregator commits
¯𝐼𝑡
←
median𝑗¯𝐼(𝑗)
𝑡
15: end if
16: on-chain checks: writer auth.; 𝑡> 𝑡on; |¯𝐼𝑡−¯𝐼on| ≤𝛿max¯𝐼on
17: if checks pass then update (¯𝐼on,𝑡on) ←(¯𝐼𝑡,𝑡); emit IndexUp-
dated
18: else reject
19: end if
20: if now −𝑡on > 𝜏then StalePause ←true
21: end if
computation step is auditable by anyone with access to the under-
lying public data. Each oracle node runs the off-chain pipeline of Sec-
tion 4.1, packages an attestation𝜎𝑡= (¯𝐼𝑡,𝑡, basketVersion,ℎ𝑡, nodeId,
sig) where ℎ𝑡is a Merkle root over its observation set, and submits
it on-chain. The contract enforces writer authentication, monotonic
timestamps, the per-epoch drift cap as defense-in-depth on equa-
tion 6, and maximum staleness 𝜏beyond which the value is treated
as stale and the risk module pauses mint and queues redeem.
Two trust models swap behind the same on-chain interface. In
the threshold-signature committee, a 𝑘-of-𝑛committee with a BLS
or Schnorr scheme produces a combined attestation accepted when
𝑘honest nodes agree; the chain verifies one signature per epoch.
In the decentralized oracle network, independent reporters submit
attestations under an aggregator (e.g., Chainlink off-chain report-
ing [7]), and the aggregator commits the median of reports. The
committee minimizes on-chain cost; the DON minimizes trust in
any specific quorum. Both produce the same on-chain artifact.
4.3
Token, NAV, Vault, and Risk Controls
ClawCoin is an ERC-20-compatible token whose value semantics
are set by the on-chain index. Define NAV𝑡= ¯𝐼𝑡/𝐼0, with NAV0 = 1.

Li et al.
A deposit of collateral 𝑥receives
𝑀𝑡(𝑥) = 𝑥/NAV𝑡
(7)
newly minted ClawCoin tokens, and burning 𝑦tokens returns
𝑅𝑡(𝑦) = 𝑦NAV𝑡of collateral. With reserves 𝐴𝑡and supply 𝑆𝑡, the
coverage ratio is
Γ𝑡= 𝐴𝑡/(𝑆𝑡· NAV𝑡),
(8)
enforced above 𝛾min > 1 on every state-changing call. ClawCoin is
thus an index-linked redeemable claim against a fiat-backed reserve,
with liabilities that move with the index; closer in spirit to an ETF
redemption mechanism with a cost-driven NAV than to a fixed-peg
stablecoin.
Four controls compose Algorithm 2’s pre-call check. Coverage
gating: mint requires Γ𝑡≥𝛾min post-application; redeem checks
coverage, but, when violated, queues rather than reverts so the
claim is preserved. Adaptive mint throttle: the per-epoch mint cap
contracts with coverage headroom ℎ𝑡= max(0, Γ𝑡−𝛾min) via
𝐶mint
𝑡
= 𝐶mint
0
· min(1,ℎ𝑡/ℎ★), so new issuance cannot eat the buffer
that protects existing holders; the redeem cap 𝐶red
𝑡
= 𝐶red
0
stays con-
stant so redemption capacity is preserved under stress. Auto-pause:
StalePause halts mint when the oracle is beyond 𝜏; Paused halts
all state changes when Γ𝑡< 𝛾pause ≤𝛾min. Defense-in-depth: the
on-chain drift cap duplicates the off-chain bound of equation 6. To-
gether, these shift shock absorption from holders onto the would-be
minter.
4.4
Settlement Semantics
ClawCoin is a standard transferable token, and this subsection is
the entire payoff of tokenizing the cost anchor: what trading the
anchor actually looks like at the smart-contract layer. Agents quote
services in ClawCoin and pay through ordinary transfers; because
every agent reads the same NAV, quotes are directly comparable
in compute units, eliminating the trusted middleware required by
Baseline A in Section 3.2.
The atomic multi-hop helper handles delegation chains. Given
a vector of (recipient, amount) tuples, it performs all transfers
in a single transaction; any revert (insufficient balance, exceeded
budget, or a downstream subtask failure signaled by a participating
contract) reverts the entire bundle. This is a thin construction over
standard transfer logic that is unavailable in Baseline A, where each
hop converts off-chain via a private index. An escrow contract holds
ClawCoin per task and releases funds on a signed receipt from
the executing agent or refunds on timeout, again as one atomic
transaction. A workflow originator can additionally pre-commit a
maximum ClawCoin budget 𝐵★to the escrow, which rejects any
subtask payment that would exceed the remaining budget at the
current NAV, namely a contract-enforced, compute-aligned budget
constraint that internal accounting cannot supply.
ClawCoin coexists with fiat-backed stablecoins: the reserve is in
USDC (or analogous collateral), and mint/redeem convert between
USDC and ClawCoin at NAV. Hybrid agents hold USDC for outside-
system payments and ClawCoin for compute-aligned coordination
inside the agent economy. The resulting property set (shared NAV,
atomic multi-hop settlement, contract-enforced budgets, auditable
reserve, and risk state) is exactly what motivates moving the unit
of account on-chain. A trusted off-chain service can replicate the
first three properties under operator trust, but only an on-chain
Algorithm 2 VaultOperation: mint, redeem, and pre-call risk
check.
Require: op ∈{Mint, Redeem} with amount 𝑧; oracle (¯𝐼𝑡,𝑡on);
vault (𝐴𝑡,𝑆𝑡); risk parameters 𝛾min,𝛾pause,𝛿max,𝜏, base caps
(𝐶mint
0
,𝐶red
0 ), headroom ℎ★
// pre-call risk-control step
1: if now −𝑡on > 𝜏then StalePause ←true
2: end if
3: NAV𝑡←¯𝐼𝑡/𝐼0; Γ𝑡←𝐴𝑡/(𝑆𝑡· NAV𝑡)
4: if Γ𝑡< 𝛾pause then Paused ←true; emit CoverageBreach
5: end if
6: ℎ𝑡←max(0, Γ𝑡−𝛾min); 𝐶mint
𝑡
←𝐶mint
0
· min(1,ℎ𝑡/ℎ★); 𝐶red
𝑡
←
𝐶red
0 ; reset epoch usage; drain pending-redeem queue under
coverage and 𝐶red
𝑡
// state-changing op
7: if op = Mint then
8:
if Paused or StalePause then revert
9:
end if
10:
Δ𝑆←𝑧/NAV𝑡
11:
if 𝑈mint
𝑡
+ Δ𝑆> 𝐶mint
𝑡
then revert
⊲rate limit
12:
end if
13:
if (𝐴𝑡+ 𝑧)/((𝑆𝑡+ Δ𝑆)NAV𝑡) < 𝛾min then revert
⊲
coverage
14:
end if
15:
commit 𝐴𝑡+= 𝑧, 𝑆𝑡+= Δ𝑆, 𝑈mint
𝑡
+= Δ𝑆; transfer Δ𝑆
ClawCoin; emit Minted
16: else
⊲op = Redeem
17:
if Paused or StalePause then enqueue (𝑧, caller); return
18:
end if
19:
Δ𝐴←𝑧· NAV𝑡
20:
if 𝑈red
𝑡
+ Δ𝐴> 𝐶red
𝑡
or (𝑆𝑡−𝑧> 0 and (𝐴𝑡−Δ𝐴)/((𝑆𝑡−
𝑧)NAV𝑡) < 𝛾min) then
21:
enqueue (𝑧, caller); return
⊲soft rate limit and
coverage check
22:
end if
23:
burn 𝑧ClawCoin; transfer Δ𝐴; commit 𝐴𝑡−= Δ𝐴, 𝑆𝑡−= 𝑧,
𝑈red
𝑡
+= Δ𝐴; emit Redeemed
24: end if
implementation provides the fourth and the censorship-resistance
that follows. Section 5 returns to this point and states what each
layer guarantees against the adversary of Section 3.3.
5
Security Analysis
We analyze ClawCoin under the threat model of Section 3.3 and the
design of Section 4. Section 5.1 states bounded-adversary properties
for the four security goals (G1) through (G4); Section 5.2 walks
through the principal attack scenarios; Section 5.3 lists what the
design does not cover. Bounds depend on parameters chosen by
governance; Section 7.4 estimates them empirically on the running
prototype.
5.1
Bounded-Adversary Properties
Index integrity (G1). Let 𝐶honest
𝑚,𝑡
denote the honest reference cost
for model 𝑚at epoch 𝑡(the representative cost that would emerge

ClawCoin : An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for Decentralized Agent Economies
from prices honest vendors post) and let A control 𝑓of 𝑛𝑚vendors
for model 𝑚. With the median estimator (equation 3) and 𝑓<
𝑛𝑚/2, per-model error is bounded by the spread of honest reports,
independently of how extreme adversarial reports are.
Lemma 1 (Median breakdown). If 𝑓< 𝑛𝑚/2, then for every
adversarial strategy
 ˜𝐶med
𝑚,𝑡−𝐶honest
𝑚,𝑡
 ≤
max
𝑣∈𝑉honest (𝑚)
𝐶𝑚,𝑣,𝑡−𝐶honest
𝑚,𝑡
.
Proposition 1 (Index integrity). Let 𝜖hon
𝑚
= max𝑣∈𝑉honest (𝑚)
|𝐶𝑚,𝑣,𝑡−𝐶honest
𝑚,𝑡
| and assume 𝑓< 𝑛𝑚/2 for every active 𝑚. The raw
index satisfies |𝐼𝑡−𝐼honest
𝑡
| ≤Í
𝑚∈𝑀★𝑤𝑚𝜖hon
𝑚.
The trimmed mean has breakdown𝑞with a corresponding bound
on residual adversarial contribution; MAD-filtered mean retains
50% breakdown and tightens tail sensitivity through 𝜅, with an
adversary conforming to the median/MAD envelope biasing the
estimate by at most 𝜅· MAD. The threshold 𝑛min guarantees break-
down for every active model.
NAV faithfulness (G2). Let 𝐼★
𝑡be the index an honest oracle
would publish and𝜂𝑡= ¯𝐼𝑡−𝐼★
𝑡the publication deviation, bounded by
whichever is smaller: the deviation any honest committee member
would have produced, or the per-epoch drift cap 𝛿max.
Proposition 2 (NAV deviation bound). With smoothing 𝜆, drift
cap 𝛿max, and oracle staleness at most 𝜏, for any 𝜃∈[𝑡,𝑡+ 𝜏],
NAV𝜃−
𝐼★
𝜃
𝐼0
 ≤
1
𝐼0
 ∞
∑︁
𝑠=0
(1 −𝜆)𝜆𝑠|𝜂𝑡−𝑠| + 𝛿max¯𝐼𝑡−1 + drift(𝜏)

,
where drift(𝜏) is the maximum honest movement of 𝐼★over a window
of length 𝜏.
The bound decomposes into attenuated past publication errors
via the EMA, the per-epoch drift cap, and the staleness-window
movement of the honest index. Tightening 𝜆,𝛿max,𝜏reduces NAV
deviation at the cost of responsiveness or liveness: these are the
knobs exposed to governance. Because the on-chain drift cap dupli-
cates the off-chain bound, even a single-epoch majority compromise
of the committee cannot exceed 𝛿max in one step.
Redeemability under stress (G3). Let 𝑔𝑡= ¯𝐼𝑡/¯𝐼𝑡−1 −1, so |𝑔𝑡| ≤
𝛿max. Let 𝜌≥0 be a reserve replenishment rate (𝐴𝑡+1 ≥𝐴𝑡(1 + 𝜌)
when mint and redeem are net zero). Algorithm 2 allows mint only
while post-application coverage ≥𝛾min.
Lemma 2 (Bounded coverage decay). Holding supply constant
and ignoring redemption, Γ𝑡+1 ≥Γ𝑡(1 + 𝜌)/(1 + 𝛿max). If 𝜌≥𝛿max
then coverage is non-decreasing.
Theorem 1 (Solvency under bounded stress). With Γ0 ≥
𝛾min, per-epoch index growth bounded by 𝛿max, replenishment rate
𝜌, and the redemption queue processed under Algorithm 2, Γ𝑡≥
Γ0
 (1 + 𝜌)/(1 + 𝛿max)𝑡. For any horizon 𝑇, Γ𝑇≥𝛾min provided
𝜌≥(1 + 𝛿max)(𝛾min/Γ0)1/𝑇−1, which becomes 𝜌≥𝛿max in the limit
Γ0 →𝛾min.
A deployable ClawCoin must either start with substantial head-
room Γ0 ≫𝛾min or adopt a yield-bearing reserve policy with 𝜌≳
𝛿max; this is the same balance-sheet constraint familiar from index-
linked liabilities, and is why ClawCoin is presented as collateral-
backed rather than algorithmically stabilized. A coordinated re-
demption rush is bounded by 𝐶red
𝑡
and the coverage check; queue-
ing converts a rush into bounded FIFO outflows and avoids the
bank-run dynamic of unbounded redemption while preserving the
claim.
Liveness and freshness (G4). The oracle protocol admits any
honest update within one confirmation and rejects updates older
than 𝜏through the staleness gate. Consumers read both ¯𝐼𝑡and 𝑡on
and detect violations directly. When StalePause fires, mint reverts
and redeem is queued: the protocol trades temporary mint capacity
for refusal to act on untrusted state. Under base-chain censorship
resistance, an honest quorum can always re-establish freshness.
5.2
Adversarial Scenarios and Defenses
S1. Stale or delayed oracle data. The adversary delays submis-
sions. The staleness gate 𝜏triggers StalePause, halting mint and
queueing redeem; honest reporters recover by submitting a fresh
attestation. During the pause, agents cannot mint: the protocol
prefers refusal to action under an untrusted state.
S2. Manipulated price inputs and Sybil vendors. The ad-
versary controls 𝑓endpoints and posts biased prices. The median
(Lemma 1) tolerates 𝑓< 𝑛𝑚/2 with bounded error; 𝑛min excludes
models with insufficient honest sources; ℎ𝑡in 𝜎𝑡enables ex-post
audit. Sybil addition is restricted by the governance-controlled ven-
dor registry. A coordinated posting that mimics honest dispersion
can shift the median within the honest envelope; this residual is
bounded by Proposition 1.
S3. Strategic provider repricing. A vendor with strong basket
weight changes its public price to influence the index (analogous
to benchmark-inclusion gaming). Smoothing and the drift cap at-
tenuate single-vendor moves; governance can rebalance weights or
remove the vendor under a timelock. Repeated small adjust

[…middle truncated for length…]

ination enters.
Pricing stability and repricing overhead. A market of hetero-
geneous service-providing agents quotes a standardized request un-
der common cost shocks; agents differ in provider mix and markup
policy. Figures 2 through 3 visualize cross-agent dispersion and
repricing behavior; Table 3 summarizes the four-regime compar-
ison on five metrics. ClawCoin yields the lowest quote volatility,
the fewest repricing events, and the tightest cross-agent disper-
sion. USDC + internal indexing improves over Fiat on volatility
and repricing, but its cross-agent dispersion and price-consistency
score stay materially worse than ClawCoin’s because each agent

Li et al.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Time Step
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Cross-Agent Quote Spread
Fiat Regime
Raw-Cost Regime
ClawCoin Regime
Figure 2: Cross-agent quote dispersion across regimes. Raw-
cost pricing exhibits the largest dispersion; ClawCoin reduces
spread by internalizing common compute movements into
the shared unit.
Fiat
Raw-Cost
ClawCoin
0
2
4
6
8
10
Average Repricing Events per Agent
Figure 3: Repricing events per agent across regimes. Fiat
and raw-cost require repeated nominal updates; ClawCoin
absorbs common movements at the unit-of-account layer.
Table 3: Pricing stability and repricing overhead.
Regime
Vol.
Repr./100
Disp.
Consist.
Drift
Fiat
0.118
26.4
0.141
0.77
0.084
Raw-cost
0.153
31.9
0.187
0.69
0.109
USDC + int.
0.074
14.2
0.093
0.86
0.049
ClawCoin
0.039
6.8
0.041
0.94
0.021
uses its own basket: absent a shared numeraire, per-agent stabiliza-
tion cannot collapse quotes onto a common scale, even when each
agent’s own accounting is stable.
Task-market feasibility under budget constraints. Customers
submit tasks with heterogeneous willingness to pay; each task may
require one or more service stages from different agents; a task is
accepted if the aggregate quote fits within the customer’s budget.
Table 4 shows that ClawCoin raises acceptance and completion
and collapses budget overruns, primarily because compute-aligned
quotes match compute-aligned customer budgets. USDC + inter-
nal indexing narrows the gap to Fiat but cannot eliminate budget
mismatches: customers and providers still reason in different units.
Table 4: Task-market feasibility. Mean price normalized to
the Fiat regime.
Regime
Accept
Compl.
Overrun
Price
Rej.
Fiat
78.6%
72.4%
6.9%
1.00x
14.8%
Raw-cost
73.1%
67.2%
9.8%
0.98x
18.6%
USDC + int.
83.5%
79.9%
4.1%
1.03x
10.2%
ClawCoin
89.8%
87.1%
0.8%
1.02x
5.4%
Table 5: Workflow-level evaluation across delegation depths
𝐷∈{1, 2, 4, 8}. Settlement latency normalized to Fiat.
Regime
Fail
Over.
Partial
Err.
Lat.
p95
Fiat
9.8%
7.1%
6.4%
0.143
1.00x
1.42x
Raw-cost
14.6%
10.9%
9.7%
0.188
0.96x
1.51x
USDC + int.
6.2%
4.8%
5.9%
0.091
1.12x
1.39x
ClawCoin
2.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.037
1.08x
1.17x
Table 6: Workflow failure rate by delegation depth.
Depth
Fiat
Raw
USDC + int.
ClawCoin
𝐷= 1
3.2%
5.8%
2.7%
1.1%
𝐷= 2
6.7%
10.9%
4.4%
1.8%
𝐷= 4
11.8%
16.5%
7.0%
2.5%
𝐷= 8
17.6%
24.8%
10.8%
3.2%
7.3
Multi-Agent Workflows and OpenClaw
Integration
The multi-agent results are the main system contribution of the
evaluation. They directly test the claim of Section 3.2 that inter-
nal indexing alone cannot supply atomic multi-hop settlement,
contract-enforced budgets, and a shared numeraire for cross-agent
coordination.
Workflow-level evaluation. The simulator is extended with
explicit multi-step delegation chains of depth 𝐷∈{1, 2, 4, 8}. Tasks
have stage-level subtasks with stage-level prices, budgets are pre-
committed at submission, and mid-flight cost shocks may push
aggregate cost above the budget. Under ClawCoin, the workflow
uses the atomic multi-hop helper and the escrow budget gate (Sec-
tion 4.4); under USDC + internal indexing, each hop converts via
the originator’s private index with off-chain reconciliation; un-
der Fiat and Raw-cost each hop denominates in USDC. Table 5
reports the aggregate comparison, and Table 6 reports the depth
breakdown. Two qualitative findings stand out. First, ClawCoin
drives partial-settlement to zero by construction (any failed hop
reverts the bundle) and eliminates budget overruns through the
pre-commit gate; both are contract-level properties that the non-
tokenized baselines cannot replicate without trusted middleware.
Second, failure rates compound with depth in every regime, but
the slope differs sharply: Fiat and Raw-cost grow steeply because
mid-flight shocks compound across hops with no atomic primitive
to bind them; USDC + internal indexing grows more slowly but
remains vulnerable to coordination failures at 𝐷= 8; ClawCoin
grows almost linearly with depth because each hop settles in the
same compute-aligned unit and the bundle is all-or-nothing.
End-to-end OpenClaw workflows. We replay representative
workflows on the OpenClaw testbed under each backend without

ClawCoin : An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for Decentralized Agent Economies
Table 7: End-to-end OpenClaw workflow evaluation across
settlement backends.
Backend
Success
Revert
Agents
Drift
usdc-fiat
81.5%
8.4%
3.6
0.116
usdc-internal-index
84.8%
6.1%
3.7
0.081
clawcoin
92.7%
2.3%
3.8
0.034
Table 8: OpenClaw economy survival over 500 rounds. Trade
volume normalized to the Fiat backend.
Backend
Surv.
Δ𝑇
Gini
Vol.
Deleg.
usdc-fiat
4/8
−18.7%
0.49
1.00x
0.38
usdc-internal-index
5/8
−9.4%
0.43
1.12x
0.44
clawcoin
6/8
+6.8%
0.38
1.34x
0.57
changes to agent logic. Three workflow categories are used: doc-
ument analysis (planner →retriever →synthesizer), structured
retrieval (planner →retriever →verifier →synthesizer), and multi-
tool research (planner →retriever →tool-use →coder →verifier
→synthesizer). Table 7 reports workflow success, protocol revert
rate, the mean number of distinct agents per task, and realized
cost drift against the originator’s pre-commit estimate. clawcoin
improves workflow success and collapses protocol reverts and cost
drift. The gain comes entirely from the settlement and budget layer,
not from any change in the cognitive layer: all three backends share
the same GLM-4.7 Flash endpoint and the same per-role prompts,
so what shrinks are the mid-flight repricing mismatches and recon-
ciliation failures that the non-atomic baselines expose.
Long-horizon economy survival. To probe coordination value
over longer horizons, we instantiate eight OpenClaw agents with
heterogeneous initial treasuries and role specializations and run a
500-round market: tasks arrive stochastically, agents quote, the plan-
ner delegates, executors deliver, and treasuries update by equation 1.
An agent is declared bankrupt and exits if its treasury cannot cover
expected operating costs over the next three rounds. Table 8 shows
that under clawcoin, more agents survive, median treasuries grow
rather than shrink, wealth distribution is less concentrated, and
inter-agent trade volume and delegation rate rise substantially. The
mechanism is not an external subsidy: every backend runs against
the same task-arrival process and the same model. The mechanism
is that a shared compute-aligned numeraire makes cross-agent
quotes legible enough for delegation to be profitable, which raises
equilibrium trade volume and avoids the cascading bankruptcies
that follow from mispriced delegation under fiat denomination.
OpenClaw resource procurement. We extend OpenClaw with
a remote-execution adapter that exposes burstily priced GPU time
as an executable subtask; three locally provisioned OpenClaw agents
and three remotely provisioned OpenClaw agents run side by side,
and the planner chooses between local and remote execution at
each subtask. Table 9 shows that the dominant pain point in the
integration is not payment transport (USDC moves cleanly across
backends) but procurement under a shared compute-aligned budget.
Under clawcoin, mid-task repricing incidents collapse, completed
workflows rise, and spend predictability across identical workflow
classes approaches one. The compute-aligned unit lets the planner
reason about local-versus-remote substitution in a single budget
Table 9: OpenClaw GPU-resource procurement across settle-
ment backends.
Backend
Attach
Deleg.
Repr.
Compl.
Pred.
usdc-fiat
86.1%
79.4%
17.8%
76.8%
0.74
usdc-internal-index
88.7%
82.5%
12.3%
80.6%
0.82
clawcoin
95.4%
91.8%
4.1%
89.9%
0.93
unit, which is the missing-primitive argument of Section 3.2 applied
to OpenClaw’s external resource market.
Across all four multi-agent experiments, the qualitative pattern
is consistent: moving the unit of account on-chain is what con-
verts compute-aligned accounting into compute-aligned coordina-
tion. USDC + internal indexing recovers most of the per-agent
stability but cannot collapse cross-agent dispersion, cannot atomi-
cally bind multi-hop delegation, cannot contract-enforce a shared
compute budget, and cannot sustain cooperative market dynamics
over long horizons. ClawCoin does all four, and the gap widens
monotonically with delegation depth, agent heterogeneity, and time
horizon.
7.4
Risk Sanity Checks
The risk module is engineering hygiene, not the paper’s main contri-
bution. We therefore reduce the adversarial and solvency evaluation
to three sanity checks that confirm the properties of Section 5 hold
on the running prototype, and defer larger adversarial sweeps to
future work. Table 10 groups the three checks.
Stale oracle. We freeze the update channel. Beyond the staleness
threshold, IndexOracle.isStale returns true, mint is rejected,
and incoming redeem requests are queued rather than executed
against an untrusted price. The contract resumes normal operation
on the next fresh attestation, exactly as specified in Section 4.3.
Single-vendor manipulation. A single vendor in a basket of
five posts has a +50% biased input price. Under the mean estimator,
the published index absorbs the bias proportionally; under the
median (the protocol default), the deviation collapses by more than
an order of magnitude, consistent with Lemma 1; with the on-
chain drift cap engaged, per-epoch deviation is further bounded
to the cap. The check is deliberately small: its role is to verify that
the median-plus-drift-cap composition behaves as expected on the
prototype.
Redemption burst. We drive the prototype through three in-
dex trajectories with a coordinated redemption rush: a mild shock
with one drift-capped step, a two-step spike, and sustained capped
growth combined with a low replenishment rate. Under the mild
shock, the queue drains cleanly. Under the two-step spike, most
redemptions are honored within a short horizon, and the rest queue.
Under sustained growth with low replenishment, the auto-pause
condition engages as predicted by Lemma 2. Across all three, no
involuntary loss to redeemers is observed; the queue absorbs short
rushes, and auto-pause is the last line of defense under sustained
adverse motion.
These results are protocol hygiene. The system claim of Claw-
Coin rests on the multi-agent results of Section 7.3, where moving
the unit of account on-chain is what converts compute-aligned
accounting into compute-aligned coordination.

Li et al.
Table 10: Risk sanity checks on the running prototype. All three confirm that the risk module behaves as designed.
Check
Condition
Observed behavior
Bound from §5
Honored / safe
Stale oracle
Beyond staleness threshold
(4 epochs)
Mint
rejected;
redeem
queued; no stale-state settle-
ment
G4, Algorithm 2
100% queued; recovers next
epoch
Vendor bias
One vendor of five posts
+50% input bias
Mean:
+11.8%;
me-
dian:
+1.9%;
+drift
cap:
+1.0%/epoch
Lemma 1, Eq. 6
Median + cap suppress bias
Redemption burst
Mild / two-step spike / sus-
tained capped growth
Queue peak 18 / 63 / 141;
pause on the third
Lemma 2, Theorem 1
100% / 92% / 61% within 5
epochs
8
Discussion, Limitations, and Future Work
8.1
Discussion
Operational asset, not speculative instrument. ClawCoin is in-
tended as operational infrastructure for decentralized agent economies,
not as a retail investment product. Demand arises from transac-
tional utility (agents need a stable unit for budgeting, quoting, and
atomic multi-hop settlement of compute-bound workflows) rather
than from appreciation expectations. Any transferable asset can
be traded, but speculation is not required for the system to pro-
duce utility, and the risk module’s per-epoch caps and pause logic
deliberately bound secondary-market velocity.
Cost-only by design. As argued in Section 4.1, the index tracks
inference cost rather than model quality, which is priced separately
in markets through reputation, contracting, and observed outcomes.
A consequence is that the unit of account alone cannot resolve in-
formation asymmetry about service quality: two agents that quote
identical ClawCoin prices for the same workload may still deliver
meaningfully different outputs, and the economy must layer rep-
utational and contractual signals on top of the compute-aligned
unit.
Regulatory posture. Because ClawCoin is redeemable against
reserve collateral and may circulate as a transferable digital as-
set, its legal treatment will depend on jurisdiction and deploy-
ment model; it may fall under stored-value, prepaid-instrument, or
reserve-backed-claim regimes in different settings, and consortium
or enterprise deployments among known counterparties have a
different profile from public circulation. We treat compliance archi-
tecture as a deployment-layer concern rather than a property of
the monetary design itself.
Toward fully machine-native pricing. The current index
ingests prices quoted in fiat, reflecting how most commercial infer-
ence is priced today and enabling transparent list-price construction.
As compute markets evolve toward direct machine-to-machine pric-
ing, native compute auctions, or tokenized GPU markets, the same
pipeline can ingest those inputs without protocol redesign, and the
unit becomes more fully machine-native.
8.2
Limitations
The index is defined over public list prices and cannot capture hid-
den enterprise discounts (Section 5.2, S7), which bounds how closely
the index tracks any individual agent’s realized cost. The integrity
bound in Proposition 1 requires 𝑓< 𝑛𝑚/2 honest vendors per
active model, and the NAV bound in Proposition 2 assumes an hon-
est oracle threshold; beyond these, guarantees degrade gracefully
(auto-pause on detected drift; redemption queueing) but cannot be
tightened by parameter choice alone. Theorem 1 bounds coverage
under bounded per-epoch growth and a positive replenishment rate,
but persistent cost increases above the replenishment rate cannot
be absorbed indefinitely by a passive collateral pool, so deployable
systems require either substantial overcollateralization, sponsor-
seeded buffer capital, or yield-bearing reserve management. The
standardized workload classes approximate rather than replace real
workloads, so agents heavily reliant on non-token components
(caching, batching, hardware tiers, network tail latency) experience
a weaker match; the basket can be widened but full alignment is
unattainable in a publicly verifiable way. Finally, Section 5.3 enu-
merates the threats not covered (full vendor collusion, correlated
regulatory shutdown, base-chain bugs, long-horizon governance
capture) and the current evaluation uses a modest-scale prototype,
simulator, and testbed; larger live deployments are left to future
work.
8.3
Future Work
Several directions follow naturally. Zero-knowledge attestations
binding index inputs to authenticated provider responses would
upgrade Proposition 1 to a bound rooted in cryptographic assump-
tions rather than vendor independence. Replacing the threshold
committee with a permissionless DON (Pyth or UMA style) and
quantifying the resulting latency/freshness/cost trade-offs is a nat-
ural deployment-track extension. Extending the workload basket
to capture latency tiers, throughput SLAs, context-window pricing,
and bundled enterprise contracts, and connecting it to tokenized
GPU and inference auctions, would tighten the gap between the
index and realized cost. On the analysis side, equilibrium analy-
sis of provider strategic repricing, governance-attack incentives,
and MEV around oracle updates would complement the bounded-
adversary results of Section 5. An end-to-end OpenClaw deploy-
ment that closes the loop between Section 7.3 and a small live
deployment, including regulated and consortium settings, is the
most concrete operational next step.
9
Conclusion
Decentralized agent economies have an emerging payment sub-
strate but lack a representation of machine-native value: a tradable,
composable, contract-readable unit aligned with the computational
cost that bottlenecks agent execution. We argued that internal cost
indexing over stablecoin rails cannot supply this primitive in a

ClawCoin : An Agentic AI-Native Cryptocurrency for Decentralized Agent Economies
decentralized setting, and we presented ClawCoin, a collateral-
backed, compute-indexed tokenized unit of account whose four
protocol layers (robust basket index, attested oracle, NAV-based
mint/redeem vault with risk controls, and on-chain atomic multi-
hop settlement) are designed under a concrete adversary model.
We stated bounded-adversary properties for index integrity, NAV
faithfulness, redeemability under stress, and liveness, and walked
through the principal attack scenarios. A prototype on an Ethereum-
compatible network, a multi-agent simulator, and a six-role Open-
Claw testbed show that moving the unit of account on-chain is
what converts compute-aligned accounting into compute-aligned
coordination: cross-agent quote dispersion collapses, multi-hop del-
egation settles atomically, contract-level budgets bind end-to-end,
and long-horizon market dynamics sustain cooperative trade. Claw-
Coin is a security-engineered, on-chain, compute-cost-indexed unit
of account, and a coherent, implementable step toward the missing
representation primitive of the decentralized AI agent economy.