1
GoAT-X: A Graph of Auditing Thoughts for
Securing Token Transactions in Cross-Chain
Contracts
Zijun Feng, Yuming Feng, Yu Wang, Weizhe Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE Yuhong Nan, Yuang Liu and Zibin
Zheng, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Cross-chain bridges, the critical infrastructure of
the multi-chain ecosystem, have become a primary target for
attackers, resulting in over $2.8 billion in losses due to subtle
implementation flaws. Existing defenses, such as bytecode-level
static analysis, are ill-equipped to handle the semantic complexity
of cross-chain interactions, while LLM-based approaches, which
can understand source code, struggle with hallucinatory reason-
ing over complex, multi-contract dependencies.
In this paper, we propose GoAT-X, a framework that shifts
automated cross-chain smart contract codebases auditing from
heuristic pattern matching toward systematic first-principles
verification. GoAT-X structures the audit process as a Graph
of Auditing Thoughts, explicitly mirroring how human experts
decompose, reason about, and validate security logic. By an-
choring LLM reasoning in statically extracted data flows and
explicitly linking abstract security properties to concrete code
implementations, the framework constrains semantic reasoning
within well-defined structural and state boundaries. Within
this constrained space, GoAT-X treats missing constraints and
adversarial bypass paths in cross-chain logic as first-class vul-
nerability targets and dynamically explores reasoning paths to
identify exploitable semantic gaps. We evaluate GoAT-X on a
comprehensive benchmark covering all known cross-chain token
transaction attacks. GoAT-X achieves 92% recall on fine-grained
audit points and 95% coverage of vulnerable projects, while
identifying 117 confirmed risks in the wild with low operational
cost, establishing a new standard for scalable, logic-driven cross-
chain security.
Index Terms—Smart Contract Security, Cross-chain Bridge,
Graph of Thoughts, Vulnerability Detection, LLM, Static Anal-
ysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cross-chain bridges have become essential infrastructure
driven by the demand for DeFi interoperability [1], [2]. How-
ever, this essential infrastructure is also highly vulnerable. The
complexity of bridge design, stemming from differences in
consensus and data structures across chains, introduces novel
attack vectors. The typical lock-and-mint mechanism, while
functional, is a frequent point of failure [3], [4]. As their Total
Zijun Feng, Yu Wang, and Weizhe Zhang are with the Harbin Institute of
Technology, Shenzhen 518038, China. Zijun Feng, Yuming Feng, and Weizhe
Zhang are also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518055, China. (E-
mail: fengzijun@stu.hit.edu.cn;fengym@pcl.ac.cn;24s151161@stu.hit.edu.cn;
2021111602@stu.hit.edu.cn; wzzhang@hit.edu.cn).
Yuhong
Nan
and
Zibin
Zheng
are
with
Sun
Yat-sen
University,
Guangzhou
510275,
China.
(E-mail:
nanyh@mail.sysu.edu.cn;
zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Yuang Liu is with the Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China.
(E-mail: 2021111602@stu.hit.edu.cn).
Weizhe Zhang is the corresponding author.
Value Locked (TVL) surges, these protocols have become a
prime target for attackers, accounting for over $2.8 billion in
losses—nearly 40% of all Web3 thefts to date [5], [6].
Securing these protocols remains challenging. Manual au-
diting is unscalable, while automated bytecode analysis suffers
from a semantic gap regarding cross-chain intent [7], [8].
Although LLM-based approaches offer semantic reasoning [9],
they struggle with cross-chain systems due to their single-
chain focus and inability to model multi-contract interactions
or generalize to novel architectures [10]–[13]. To the best
of our knowledge, currently, there is no effective solution
that supports automated, source-code-level auditing of large-
scale cross-chain codebases, leaving a critical and unresolved
security gap.
Achieving fully automated auditing faces fundamental hur-
dles due to the intricate and disjointed nature of cross-chain
execution, where asynchronous events inherently fragment the
continuous control flow required for precise multi-contract
modeling. This complexity is further amplified by the sheer
scale of cross-chain codebases, which necessitates tracking
subtle state dependencies across massive, heterogeneous con-
tract networks to verify security properties effectively.
In this paper, we propose GoAT-X (Graph of Auditing
Thoughts for X-Chain), a novel framework that shifts cross-
chain security from heuristic pattern-based detection to sys-
tematic first-principles verification. This approach establishes
security by strictly validating the fundamental predicates of
Integrity, Authenticity, and Safety against code execution.
GoAT-X orchestrates a five-layer automated pipeline that
synergizes static analysis, semantic embeddings, and Large
Language Models (LLMs) within a structured reasoning graph.
Specifically, the framework emulates the cognitive depth of
expert auditors by deconstructing the verification task into five
progressive stages: locating transaction code, mapping param-
eters, tracing data flows, verifying constraints, and analyzing
bypass paths.
Crucially, GoAT-X constrains LLM reasoning within ex-
plicit structural and state boundaries. Layer 1 and Layer
3 leverage static analysis and context-aware code slicing
to extract transaction-specific data flows, ensuring semantic
inference is grounded in concrete execution logic. Across
all reasoning stages (Layers 2, 4, and 5), we employ model
ensembling and a universal self-correction mechanism to rig-
orously synthesize audit traces while mitigating hallucinations.
This pipeline is further refined by encoder-based aggregation
arXiv:2604.24341v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

2
in Layer 4 for deduplication, and retrieval-augmented gener-
ation (RAG) in Layer 5 to anchor bypass analysis in state
context and historical exploit knowledge.
To evaluate GoAT-X, we construct a comprehensive vul-
nerability benchmark by integrating open-source datasets with
incident reports from authoritative security platforms. This
dataset comprises 673 smart contracts across 20 distinct cross-
chain projects, which we meticulously annotated to establish
294 fine-grained audit points as ground truth. On this bench-
mark, GoAT-X demonstrates robust performance: it achieves
92% recall on audit points, reflecting high semantic coverage
of security constraints; and successfully achieves 95% cov-
erage of vulnerable projects in the benchmark, validating its
practical detection effectiveness.
Contributions. We summarize the contributions as follows:
• We propose GoAT-X, a framework that reframes vulner-
ability detection from pattern-based inspection to con-
strained, first-principles reasoning. By structuring the
audit process as a Graph of Auditing Thoughts (GoAT),
it synergizes static analysis with LLM reasoning to
systematically explore execution paths while minimizing
hallucinations.
• We define a Cross-Chain Token Transaction Verification
Framework that formalizes security properties into en-
forceable predicates. This addresses the semantic gap in
existing tools by providing a rigorous constraint space for
identifying missing checks and bypass paths.
• We construct a comprehensive vulnerability benchmark
by collecting and deeply annotating a wide range of
representative cross-chain token transaction attacks. We
then conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies
to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of GoAT-X.
II. PRELIMINARY
Cross-chain Model and Attack Surface. Smart contracts
underpin cross-chain bridges, enabling asset interoperability
through a lock-and-mint mechanism. As illustrated in Figure 1,
the architecture consists of a source chain, a destination chain,
and off-chain relayers, facilitating the following workflow:
1) Source Chain Operation: A user initiates a request via
a Router contract, which triggers the Token contract
to lock or burn assets and emits a cross-chain event
containing transaction details.
2) Off-Chain Verification: Off-chain relayers continuously
listen to the source chain. Once a cross-chain event is
captured, they verify it to ensure the legitimacy of the
transaction.
3) Destination Chain Execution: Upon receiving valid cre-
dentials, the destination Router invokes the Token con-
tract to unlock or mint equivalent assets to the user.
While this architecture enables interoperability, the dis-
jointed state space introduces novel attack vectors that tradi-
tional single-chain security models fail to cover. We categorize
the cross-chain attack surface into three semantic layers:
• Integrity Violation (Malformed Data): Attackers may
initiate transactions with logically invalid parameters
(e.g., zero amounts or conflicting token addresses) that
bypass superficial checks on the source chain.
• Authenticity Violation (Spoofing & Replay): The dis-
connect between chains allows attackers to forge cross-
chain messages or replay valid historical messages if
cryptographic proofs or nonces are not rigorously en-
forced.
• Safety Violation (Execution Manipulation): Even with
valid messages, the execution context can be manipulated.
Attackers may exploit arbitrary external calls or insuffi-
cient slippage protection to hijack control flow and drain
liquidity.
Fig. 1. Cross-chain Transaction Workflow
Large Language Models (LLMs) and Division of Thoughts.
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT [14], Gem-
ini [15], and Deepseek [16] have demonstrated powerful
capabilities in code understanding, generation, and logical
reasoning. They are increasingly being used to solve general
problems across various tasks. However, during the reasoning
process, they are still confined to a character-level, left-to-right
decision-making process [17]. To address these limitations,
researchers have proposed architectures that explore multiple
thought processes, such as Tree of Thoughts (ToT) [17] and
Graph of Thoughts (GoT) [18].
As illustrated in Figure 2, Tree of Thoughts (ToT) structures
problem-solving as a search tree, employing branching and
backtracking to explore intermediate states and avoid local
optima. Graph of Thoughts (GoT) significantly enhances this
by transforming the tree into a graph (Figure 2b), introducing
novel “aggregate” and “refine” operations. These capabilities
allow previously separate reasoning paths to converge and
share context, enabling a more efficient and controllable
exploration of complex reasoning spaces.
Inspired by the “Division of Thoughts” principle, we apply
a similar task decomposition strategy to tackle the complex
challenge of auditing cross-chain smart contract codebases.
III. GOAT-X OVERVIEW
Through a comprehensive analysis of existing cross-chain
vulnerabilities, we observe a unifying security perspective:
historically observed cross-chain attacks can be attributed
to missing constraints or bypassable validations associated
with fundamental cross-chain properties. Specifically, these
properties encapsulate the inherent attributes of cross-chain
interactions, such as message payloads, external call targets,
and price slippage. To defend against varying attack vectors,
these properties must be governed by rigorous constraints
spanning three core dimensions: Integrity, Authenticity, and
Safety. A comprehensive formalization of these properties and

3
(a) Tree of Thoughts
(b) Graph of Thoughts
Fig. 2. A comparison of thought organization structures. (a) Tree of Thoughts,
which explores different reasoning paths in a branching manner. (b) Graph of
Thoughts, which allows paths to merge, enabling more complex and efficient
exploration.
their corresponding enforceable constraints is detailed later
in §IV. As illustrated in Figure 3, when the constraint of
security properties is absent or can be bypassed, adversaries
are able to carefully craft cross-chain inputs to violate intended
guarantees and maliciously siphon tokens.
This perspective provides the factual foundation for our
first-principle verification approach. Guided by it, we de-
sign GoAT-X with the objective of systematically identifying
whether security properties in code are enforced by corre-
sponding constraints and whether such constraints can be
bypassed in practice. Building on this, we conduct a detailed
analysis of the cross-chain execution process and construct
a comprehensive Cross-Chain Token Transaction Verification
Framework, within which all subsequent reasoning is explicitly
constrained.
Leveraging the event-driven nature of cross-chain logic,
GoAT-X uses cross-chain events as anchors to precisely local-
ize and extract the implementation code relevant to each cross-
chain transaction from large-scale smart contract codebases.
It then abstracts security properties and their associated data
flows, and evaluates whether the predicates defined in the
Verification Framework are correctly enforced along these data
flows or can be bypassed by adversarial executions.
Fig. 3. Examples of Missing or Bypassed Security Property Validation
As illustrated in Figure 4, GoAT-X adopts a five-layer audit
graph architecture. Each node in the graph corresponds to
an atomic auditing thought, defined as a structured interme-
diate reasoning unit generated during the auditing process.
Such a thought encapsulates cross-chain contract semantics,
partial security properties, associated data flows, constraint
implementations, or constraint-bypass inferences. The overall
architecture is orchestrated by the Verification Framework
Gateway, which manages the flow of auditing thoughts across
layers. At each stage, the Gateway normalizes incoming
thoughts into structured representations through static analysis
and selectively dispatches them to external LLMs or encoder-
based components for further reasoning. The resulting outputs
are then transformed into atomic auditing thoughts and reinte-
grated into the audit graph, ensuring that all reasoning remains
aligned with the Verification Framework.
By progressively connecting these individual auditing
thoughts within the five-layer Graph of Auditing Thoughts,
GoAT-X systematically reproduces an expert’s entire rea-
soning chain, culminating in a comprehensive audit report.
Implementation details for the Cross-Chain Token Transaction
Verification Framework and the Graph of Auditing Thoughts
are provided in §IV and §V, respectively.
IV. CROSS-CHAIN TOKEN TRANSACTION VERIFICATION
FRAMEWORK
We formally define the security properties and correspond-
ing predicates governing the on-chain lifecycle of cross-chain
transactions in GoAT-X. These definitions serve as the foun-
dation for the internal Gateway, which applies the underlying
principles to systematically guide and constrain the analysis
across all layers.
A. Transaction Verification Property Definition
We define a standardized schema for cross-chain transac-
tions to ensure comprehensive coverage of the attack surface,
particularly focusing on externally-controllable parameters and
historical vulnerability patterns [7], [8], [19].
First, we define a standardized cross-chain message struc-
ture M. This structure encapsulates all the core information
required from the source chain to the destination chain and
serves as the basis for all subsequent on-chain verification
logic. The explanation of each field is shown in Table I.
M = {sc, ss, dc, dr, t, a, n}
(1)
TABLE I
EXPLANATION OF EACH FIELD
Field
Explanation
sc
Source chain identifier
ss
Sender address
dc
Destination chain identifier
dr
Receiver address
t
Token address
a
Token amount
n
Nonce
Beyond cross-chain messages, our framework incorporates
external contract interactions and slippage parameters (the
actual token output, execution price variation, etc.) into the
verification scope. This inclusion is necessitated by the preva-
lence of exploits targeting arbitrary external calls [20] and flash

4
Fig. 4.
The GoAT-X Architecture. The system integrates a foundational static analysis layer with a multi-stage Large Language Model (LLM) layer to
perform comprehensive, end-to-end auditing. The workflow progressively transforms the codebase into a comprehensive Audit Report, composed of structured
intermediate results from each layer: extracted transaction code (Layer 1), property-parameter mappings (Layer 2), data flow slices (Layer 3), verified predicates
(Layer 4), and confirmed bypass paths (Layer 5).
loan attack [21]. Formally, the source-chain property structure
S is defined as:
S = {M, sextAddr, sextF unc, slippage}
(2)
For the destination chain contract, verification must strictly
target two primary attack vectors: the incoming cross-chain
message with its attesting signature, and the external calls
executing subsequent business logic. Accordingly, we design
the verification property structure as follows:
D = {M, dextAddr, dextF unc, signature}
(3)
B. Transaction Verification Predicates
To systematically neutralize the attack surface defined in §II,
we formalize a set of security predicates grounded in three
fundamental principles: Integrity, Authenticity, and Safety.
Rather than generic vulnerability patterns, these predicates
serve as targeted countermeasures against specific cross-chain
threats:
• Integrity: Ensures that each user-initiated cross-chain
request is complete, unambiguous, and logically well-
formed, filtering out malformed or invalid inputs.
• Authenticity:
Verifies that a request is genuinely au-
thorized by its claimed originator, is unique, and has not
been replayed.
• Safety: Ensures that executing a valid and authentic
request does not introduce unintended risks, including the
abuse of the protocol to attack other contracts.
To realize the security requirements, we define a compre-
hensive set of formal predicates at critical checkpoints across
the cross-chain lifecycle. (Table II)
These predicates collectively form the Verification Frame-
work, in which Ps represents the source chain predicate logic
and Pd represents the destination chain predicate logic:
Integrity Verification:
P (1)
s
(S) :=dr ̸= ZeroAddr ∧a > 0∧
dc ̸= ChainId()
(4)
P (1)
d
(D) :=dr ̸= ZeroAddr ∧a > 0∧
dc = ChainId()
(5)
These verification steps formalize parameter sanity checks
to exclude malformed requests and ensure logical soundness.
The pNetwork bridge exploit [22] illustrates the consequences
of missing such validation, where zero-amount transactions
were accepted.
Authenticity Verification:
P (2)
s
(S) :=t ∈AddrWhitelist∧
n = NonceNext(ss)∧
dc ∈SupportedChains
(6)
P (2)
d
(D) :=NonceUnsed(sc, n)∧
sc ∈SupportedChains∧
V alidProof(M, signature)
(7)
Authenticity verification formalizes message authorization
and temporal uniqueness, ensuring that each request is le-
gitimately authorized and executed exactly once. Failures in
this layer, such as the Nomad bridge exploit [23], demonstrate
how flawed authorization logic can lead to arbitrary message
execution.
Safety Verification:
P (3)
s
(S) :=sextAddr ∈AddrWhitelist∧
sextF unc ∈FuncWhitelist∧
LockedCorrect(ss, t, a)∧
MinExecutionBounded(slippage)∧
ReferencePriceBounded(slippage)
(8)

5
TABLE II
CROSS-CHAIN VERIFICATION PREDICATE DEFINITIONS
Predicate
Explanation
ChainId()
The chain ID of the current contractr
ZeroAddr
Zero address
SupportedChains
The set of chains supported by the protocol
Balance(address, token)
An address’s token balance
NonceNext(sender)
The source chain’s next expected nonce for each sender
NonceUnused(chain, nonce)
The nonce on the destination chain has not been used yet
AddrWhitelist, FuncWhitelist
Address/Function Whitelist
V alidProof(M, signature)
Verify the integrity and correctness of the signature
AssetMap(chain, token)
Secure asset registry on the chain
LockedCorrect(sender, token, amount)
The balance changes correctly after the source chain contract assets are locked/burnt
UnlockedCorrect(receiver, token, amount)
The balance changes correctly after the destination chain assets are unlocked/minted
MinExecutionBounded(slippage)
The user’s received amount is bounded by a minimum execution threshold
ReferencePriceBounded(slippage)
The execution price deviation is bounded against a protocol-defined or external reference price
P (3)
d
(D) :=dextAddr ∈AddrWhitelist∧
dextF unc ∈FuncWhitelist∧
UnLockedCorrect(ss, t′, a)
(9)
Safety verification formalizes execution-time constraints to
prevent unintended side effects, ensuring that legitimate re-
quests cannot be abused to compromise the ecosystem. Lapses
in such checks, like the vulnerability in Qbridge that failed
to validate account locks [24], result in significant financial
damage.
The final execution condition is that the source chain
contract executes successfully if and only if:
P (1)
s
(S) ∧P (2)
s
(S) ∧P (3)
s
(S)
(10)
The destination chain contract execution is successful if and
only if:
P (1)
d
(D) ∧P (2)
d
(D) ∧P (3)
d
(D)
(11)
Together, these predicates constitute a defense-in-depth ver-
ification logic that precisely delineates the cross-chain attack
surface and enables systematic detection of authorization,
validation, and execution flaws. This logic serves as the
formal backbone of GoAT-X, supporting sound, extensible,
and automated cross-chain security analysis.
V. THE FIVE AUDITING LAYERS OF THE GOAT-X
We aim to perform a deep, end-to-end analysis of cross-
chain codebases to ensure that non-bypassable validation
policies, as prescribed by our Verification Framework, are
correctly implemented at the code level. To tackle this complex
task, we emulate an expert’s audit methodology by decon-
structing the verification task into five manageable sub-tasks,
each corresponding to a layer in our architecture: locating
code, identifying parameters, tracing data flows, verifying
constraints, and analyzing bypasses. Together, these layers
construct a structured Graph of Auditing Thoughts.
Different auditing tasks require different analytical capa-
bilities. We therefore combine two complementary modules:
static analysis for precise and complete data-flow reasoning,
and LLM-based analysis for semantic interpretation and ab-
straction. This hybrid design enables efficient and accurate
static analysis, complemented by large language models that
resolve semantic ambiguities beyond the reach of traditional
techniques.
Formally, we model our auditing process as a tuple (G, O),
where G = (S, E) is a graph representing the reasoning pro-
cess, and O = {G, T , V, R} denotes a set of operations that act
on this graph. Lowercase symbols (e.g., x, y, z) denote atomic
auditing thoughts generated during the analysis. Within the
graph G, each node is a state s ∈S, defined as s = [x, z1...i].
This state encapsulates the initial input x and the sequence
of thoughts z1...i generated thus far. E ⊆S × S is a set of
directed edges, representing the transitions between reasoning
states. This formalization provides a unifying abstraction for
integrating static analysis and LLM-driven reasoning within a
single audit graph.
Static Analysis (SA) Module: Serving as the core engine
for Layer 1 and Layer 3, this module leverages external tools
to construct Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) for cross-chain
contract repositories. Based on the ASTs, it identifies cross-
chain token transaction code and performs data-flow analysis
to extract security properties within code snippets. We denote
the static analysis module as q and define the operation to
obtain structured thoughts based on the current state s as
R(q, s). This operation yields a variable-sized set of thoughts
based on the distinct logical implementations within the code:
R(q, s) ∼q([z1...ks
i
] | s)
(12)
where the number of thoughts ks is determined by the
distinct cross-chain logics identified in the code.
Large Language Model (LLM) Module: Serving as the core
engine for Layers 2, 4, and 5, the LLM module adopts a multi-
stage generate–aggregate–evaluate paradigm to conduct deep
security analysis. This structured approach improves result
correctness through cross-validation, enabling reasoning capa-
bilities that extend beyond single-pass inference. At each layer,
GoAT-X employs an ensemble of different LLMs queried with
structured prompts to generate multiple candidate reasoning
paths. These paths are systematically merged into a unified
thought, which is then evaluated. The most reliable reasoning
outcome is selected based on confidence scoring. To improve
robustness, we incorporate self-correction to suppress hallu-
cinated inferences and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG)

6
to ground high-level bypass analysis in a protocol-specific
context.
We denote the LLM module parameterized by θ as pθ, and
define the following core operations:
1) Thoughts Generation (G):This operation expands the
reasoning space from a given state s by leveraging
an ensemble of kG LLMs to generate diverse paral-
lel thought candidates. Each model produces next-step
thoughts conditioned on the current state.
G(pθ, s, kG) ∼pgenerate
θ
([z1...kG
i+1
]|s)
(13)
2) State Aggregation (T ):This operation consolidates a set
of candidate states S by merging semantically or struc-
turally equivalent thoughts. It employs encoder-based
similarity scoring and rule-based matching to prune
redundant outputs and to merge thoughts corresponding
to the same security property or constraint into a unified
thought z′
i+1:
T (pθ, S) ∼paggregate
θ
(z′
i+1|S)
(14)
3) State Evaluation (V): This operation evaluates candi-
date property or constraint analyses a within a given
state and selects the highest-scoring one to form a
consolidated thought. An LLM-based value function
pvalue
θ
assigns confidence scores v ∈[0, 100] to each
candidate, and the top-ranked result is retained as the
output thought.
V(pθ, s) ∼argmax
a∈s
pvalue
θ
(v|s, a)
(15)
The overall methodology integrating these operations is
detailed in the pseudocode in Algorithm 1. While the al-
gorithm generates sets of state nodes St at each layer, the
edges Et are implicitly defined by the parent-child rela-
tionships. By formalizing these connections, for instance as
Et = {(parent(s), s)|s ∈St}, we can then proceed to
construct the five-layer auditing graph G = (∪5
t=1St, ∪5
t=1Et).
Algorithm 1 Exploration of Auditing Layers
Require: codebase C, size of the model ensemble kG
1: S0 ←{[C]}
2: for t=1,...,5 do
3:
St ←∅
4:
for s in St−1 do
5:
if layer t in LLM module then
6:
S′
t ←{[s, zt]|zt ∈G(pθ, s, kG)}
7:
s′ ←[s, T (pθ, S′
t)]
8:
St ←St ∪{[s, V(pθ, s′)]}
9:
end if
10:
if layer t in SA module then
11:
St ←St ∪{[s, zt]|zt ∈R(q, s)}
12:
end if
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return ∪5
t=1St
A. Layer 1: Cross-Chain Transaction Code Extraction(SA)
The primary objective of this layer is to decompose a large
and complex codebase into a set of foundational auditing
thoughts, each capturing a self-contained and transaction-
specific code flow. By constraining the analysis to these critical
flows, the layer enables fine-grained inspection while effec-
tively focusing the LLM on the most relevant implementation
logic.
To this end, GoAT-X first constructs a directed function call
graph for the entire codebase using Slither [25] and Surya
[26], as illustrated in Figure 5. Functions emitting key cross-
chain events are then identified as anchors. Starting from
these anchors, a dual Breadth-First Search (BFS) traversal
is performed to isolate the complete execution logic of each
cross-chain transaction.
Fig. 5.
A partial illustration of the function call graph. Nodes of different
colors belong to different smart contracts, clearly showing the interactions
between them.
Guided by event anchors on both the source and destination
chains, this dual-traversal strategy precisely localizes the code
relevant to a cross-chain operation. Each extracted flow is
treated as a node in the auditing graph and serves as the trusted
input for all subsequent analysis layers (Algorithm 2).
Algorithm 2 Extracting Cross-Chain Functions as Nodes
Require: codebase C, cross-chain event Event
1: G ←BUILDGRAPH(C)
▷Using Slither & Surya
2: E ←FINDFUNCTION(C, Event)
▷Regex for events
3: N ←∅
4: for each function e in E do
5:
S ←{e}
▷Backward BFS
6:
S′ ←{e}
7:
while S′ is not empty do
8:
S′ ←{u | u /∈S, v ∈S, edge(u, v) ∈G}
9:
S ←S′ ∪S
10:
end while
11:
S ←{s|s ∈S, s has "public" or "external"}
12:
for s ∈S do:
▷Forward BFS
13:
n ←{s}
14:
S′ ←{s}
15:
while S′ is not empty do
16:
S′ ←{v | u ∈n, v /∈n, edge(u, v) ∈G}
17:
n ←S′ ∪n
18:
end while
19:
Add n to N
20:
end for
21: end for
22: return N
B. Layer 2: Property-Parameter Mapping(LLM)
We formulate this step as an entity recognition task,
where large language models are leveraged to establish high-

7
confidence semantic mappings between abstract security prop-
erties and concrete code parameters. Figure 6 illustrates the
overall workflow.
Given an analysis node from Layer 1, the Gateway enriches
it with relevant security properties and forwards a unified
code–property context to the Generator. The Generator issues
a single consolidated prompt to an ensemble of kG LLMs,
enabling diverse yet complementary property–parameter hy-
potheses.
The resulting mappings are aggregated to remove redun-
dancy and then validated by an Evaluator, which assigns
confidence scores to each candidate. For each security prop-
erty, only the highest-scoring mapping is retained, while
low-confidence mappings and nodes are pruned, preventing
conflicting semantic bindings and enforcing a deterministic,
high-precision output.
Each validated property–parameter mapping is finally en-
capsulated as a new auditing thought node, forming the output
of this layer. Prompt templates are provided in Appendix.
Fig. 6. Workflow of Layer 2
C. Layer 3: Data Flow Extraction(SA)
To isolate parameter-specific data flow slices and provide
high-signal inputs for subsequent LLM reasoning, we design
a lightweight static data flow analyzer. While LLM-based
methods [27] can perform sliced dataflow extraction, they typ-
ically incur prohibitive computational costs and latency while
remaining prone to hallucinations. Leveraging the extracted
parameters and the codebase AST constructed in Layer 1,
the analyzer identifies all parameter-related tainted variables
T through a three-stage process.
1) Bidirectional Taint Propagation: Unlike traditional
unidirectional analysis, we adopt an aggressive infec-
tion strategy to capture implicit dependencies. For any
statement σ, let Vσ be the set of all identifiers involved.
The taint set T is updated as:
Tnext = T ∪Vσ | Vσ ∩T ̸= ∅
(16)
2) Inter-procedural Mapping: To handle cross-contract
logic, the analyzer maintains a function signature cache
S : func →{p1, . . . , pn}. Upon encountering a Func-
tionCall at a call site with arguments {a1, . . . , an}, the
state is propagated via:
ai ∈T
=⇒pi ∈T
(17)
Algorithm 3 Context-Aware Code Slicing
1: Require: AST Map A, Taint Set T
2: function EXTRACT(node, C, force)
3:
is tainted ←CheckTaint(node, T )
4:
zlocal ←∅
5:
if node.type ∈{If, For, While} then
6:
ctx ←Rec(node.condition)
7:
C′ ←C ∪{ctx}
8:
zsub ←EXTRACT(node.body, C′, is tainted ∨force)
9:
if zsub ̸= ∅∨is tainted ∨force then
10:
zlocal ←zlocal ∪{(ctx, C)}
11:
zlocal ←zlocal ∪zsub
12:
end if
13:
else if node.type = Block then
14:
for each stmt ∈node.statements do
15:
zlocal ←zlocal ∪EXTRACT(stmt, C, force)
16:
end for
17:
else if is tainted ∨force then
18:
code ←Rec(node)
19:
zlocal ←zlocal ∪{(code, C)}
20:
end if
21:
return zlocal
22: end function
23: Zraw ←∅
24: for each root ∈A do
25:
Zraw ←Zraw ∪EXTRACT(root, ∅, False)
26: end for
27: ZSA ←Reformat(Zraw) ▷Refactor into standard code format
28: return ZSA
3) Convergence: The module iteratively scans the AST
until |T | reaches a fixed point.
After identifying the taint set T , the module applies context-
aware code slicing to construct a concise data flow represen-
tation ZSA. To materialize the sliced AST into a form suitable
for downstream reasoning, We define a recursive operator
Rec : N →S to map AST nodes to their corresponding
Solidity code representations. A partial specification is given
as follows:
Rec(σ) =





name(σ)
σ ∈Identifier
Rec(σleft) ⊕op ⊕Rec(σright)
σ ∈BinaryOp
Rec(σhead) ∪Rec(σbody)
σ ∈FuncDef
(18)
To preserve path constraints essential for security reasoning,
the slicer forcibly includes enclosing branch conditions when-
ever a tainted statement appears within a conditional block,
even if the condition itself is not directly tainted. This design
ensures that the resulting slices retain sufficient semantic
context for constraint verification while significantly reducing
token complexity. Algorithm 3 presents a simplified Context-
Aware Code Slicing procedure, which generates parameter-
specific data flow slices for each target variable. This layer
deliberately favors conservative static slicing over expressive
but unstable LLM-based extraction, trading completeness for
robustness and predictable cost.
D. Layer 4: Predicate Coverage Check(LLM)
Leveraging the insight that LLMs reason more effectively
over natural language than symbolic logic [28], the Gateway

8
first translates each formal security predicate into a descriptive,
natural language format.
The Generator then produces kG
candidate analyses,
identifying potential constraint implementations within the
parameter-specific data flow slice. To avoid redundant reason-
ing, the Aggregator performs semantic-level pruning across
these LLM-generated candidates by comparing the semantic
similarity of their constraint-implementing code snippets.
Specifically, each snippet is encoded using UniXcoder [29],
a pretrained model with strong cross-language generalization
for semantic code representation and clone detection, to obtain
a contextual embedding v, followed by L2 normalization.
We quantify the redundancy between candidates A and B
using cosine similarity, which reduces to a dot product for
normalized embeddings:
Similarity(A, B) = vA · vB
(19)
Candidates exceeding a similarity threshold kv are pruned,
retaining only unique semantic logic. This pruning stage serves
as a low-cost filter, significantly reducing token consumption
by preventing the expensive Evaluator from processing seman-
tically equivalent analyses.
Finally, the remaining candidates are scored for correct-
ness, and the highest-confidence verified implementation is
forwarded to the bypass analysis stage. The overall workflow is
illustrated in Figure 7, with detailed prompt templates provided
in Appendix.
Fig. 7. Workflow of Layer 4
E. Layer 5: Bypass Analysis(LLM)
Historical incident analysis shows that verification by-
passes often stem from two overlooked vectors: improper
configuration of state variables and pre-existing single-chain
vulnerabilities. To address these challenges, Layer 5 adopts
an attacker-centric reasoning strategy that augments LLM
analysis along two complementary dimensions: state-aware
execution context and experience-driven bypass knowledge.
The Augmenter incorporates two auxiliary retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG) modules to systematically guide bypass
exploration.
State Context Enhancement. The module enriches the anal-
ysis with precise state information (Figure 9). Each function
in the codebase is assigned a stable identifier derived from
its original source, enabling efficient retrieval of its associated
state variables and initialized values from the imported con-
tracts. During analysis, the recovered state context is injected
Fig. 8. Workflow of Layer 5
into the prompt, allowing the LLM to reason about bypasses
that depend on concrete initialization or runtime state, rather
than code structure alone.
Bypass Knowledge Retrieval. To further guide attacker-
style reasoning, this module supplies principle-level bypass
knowledge distilled from real-world exploits. We curate repre-
sentative constraint-bypass patterns from established sources,
including the SWC registry [30] and the 101 DeFi Hacks
dataset [31]. For efficient similarity-based retrieval, represen-
tative code snippets are encoded using UniXcoder to obtain
semantic embeddings, which are indexed in a FAISS vector
database using inner-product similarity. Instead of exposing
exploit-specific code, each pattern is abstracted into structured
metadata that summarizes its underlying bypass principle and
root cause. During analysis, retrieved bypass principles are
provided as few-shot references, steering the LLM toward
historically effective attack strategies while mitigating hallu-
cinated or implausible reasoning.
After the Gateway passes the intermediate outputs from
previous layers, the Augmenter enriches the analysis context
with state-aware and bypass-oriented information. The aug-
mented context from both modules instructs the Generator to
act as an attacker and produce kG independent analyses, each
proposing a potential bypass path along with a viable Proof
of Concept (PoC). The Aggregator merges valid outputs and
removes empty responses. Each remaining bypass candidate is
then passed to the Evaluator for a rigorous second-level review
and confidence scoring. Only scenarios exceeding a predefined
threshold are confirmed as valid vulnerabilities and included
in the final report. The overall workflow is illustrated in Figure
8, with detailed prompt templates provided in Appendix.
F. Implementation
The GoAT-X architecture is implemented in roughly 7,000
lines of Python, with the following key specifications.
Hallucination Mitigation. To mitigate hallucinations in LLM-
generated outputs, we go beyond ensemble-based aggregation
and structured prompting by incorporating an explicit self-
correction mechanism. We introduce a lightweight error detec-
tion module that validates each output against the Gateway-
defined verification framework. Outputs are deemed invalid
if they violate the JSON schema, omit required fields, or
introduce content unsupported by the input. Detected errors
are incorporated into a self-correction prompt, which is then
appended to the original prompt and fed back to the model for

9
Fig. 9. State Context Enhancement Method
iterative refinement. Models that fail to produce a valid output
within a bounded number of attempts are discarded to prevent
unreliable analyses from propagating downstream.
Self-Correction Prompt
[System Error]: The previous generation failed with error:
{error msg}. Please strictly follow the format requirements,
ensure the output is valid JSON, and the required fields
contain valid and correct information.
Model and its parameter. For our experiments, we select
a representative ensemble of mainstream closed-source and
open-source LLMs, including DeepSeek [16], GPT [14], and
Gemini [15]. All selected models support context windows of
at least 64k tokens, satisfying our experimental requirements.
To balance performance, cost, and efficiency, we adopt stable
and cost-effective variants from each family: DeepSeek-V3.2,
Gemini-2.5-Flash, and GPT-4o-Mini. We exclude DeepSeek-
Reasoner due to its excessive deliberation behavior, which
results i

[…middle truncated for length…]

rojects?

10
A. RQ1:Semantic Accuracy of GoAT-X Audit Point Identifica-
tion
To answer RQ1,we established a rigorous ground truth
through expert manual annotation across 20 cross-chain
projects comprising 673 smart contracts, resulting in 294 dis-
tinct fine-grained audit points. As detailed in our Verification
Framework, annotations were categorized into three semantic
layers: (1) Property-Parameter Mapping (mapping properties
to code variables), (2) Predicate Coverage Check (aligning
predicates with implementation logic), and (3) Bypass Analy-
sis (identifying vulnerabilities and rationales).
Performance was measured via Precision, Recall, and F1-
score. We recorded a True Positive (TP) only when the model’s
output semantically aligned with the expert annotation, includ-
ing the correct prediction of non-existent links (‘None’). A
False Negative (FN) was logged for any missed annotation,
and a False Positive (FP) for any reported finding not present
in the ground truth. Then we calculate the corresponding recall
= TP/(TP + FN), precision = TP/(TP + FP), F1-score =
2 ∗recall ∗precision/(recall + precision).
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our design, we conduct
a comprehensive ablation study to systematically assess the
contribution of each major component. In addition to the full
GoAT-X framework with model ensembling, we evaluate: (1)
single-model baselines using DeepSeek-V3.2, GPT-4o-Mini,
and Gemini-2.5-Flash, where model ensembling is disabled
but the graph-based reasoning framework is retained and
instantiated via iterative queries to a single model; (2) a chain-
of-thought variant, CoAT-X, which replaces the graph-based
reasoning in GoAT-X with a linear chain structure and is
instantiated with Gemini-2.5-Flash; and (3) a GoAT-X variant
with the RAG modules in Layer 5 removed. The results of
these ablation experiments are reported in Table III.
TABLE III
AUDITING PERFORMANCE WITH DIFFERENT METHODS
Method
#TP
#FN
#FP
Recall
Precision
F1-score
GoAT-X
270
24
25
0.92
0.92
0.92
GoAT-X(DeepSeek)
244
50
9
0.83
0.96
0.89
GoAT-X(GPT)
251
43
68
0.85
0.79
0.82
GoAT-X(Gemini)
257
37
18
0.87
0.93
0.90
CoAT-X(Gemini)
247
47
15
0.84
0.94
0.89
GoAT-X w/o RAG
261
33
22
0.89
0.92
0.90
The experimental results show that GoAT-X accurately
identifies the vast majority of annotated vulnerability points,
achieving the best trade-off between precision and coverage
and thereby validating the effectiveness of the overall archi-
tecture.
While single-model variants remain effective under graph-
based reasoning, they exhibit clear recall–precision biases
due to model-specific behaviors. Model ensembling mitigates
these systematic biases and significantly improves overall
robustness.
Moreover, graph-based reasoning consistently outperforms
linear chain reasoning in terms of recall, particularly for com-
plex bypass logic, while maintaining comparable precision.
Finally, the RAG module provides critical high-level bypass
cues that are difficult to infer from code structure alone,
enabling the system to recover key vulnerability points missed
in the final analysis layer.
Answer to RQ1: GoAT-X demonstrates strong se-
mantic understanding in accurately identifying fine-
grained audit points. Leveraging model ensembling,
it achieves 92% coverage of expert-annotated ground-
truth vulnerability points. Extensive ablation studies
further validate the effectiveness and necessity of each
major component in the overall architecture.
B. RQ2:Effectiveness of Vulnerability Detection
To answer RQ2, we evaluate GoAT-X’s ability to identify
the root causes of vulnerabilities within an entire project. Since
our methodology does not detect vulnerabilities directly, the
criteria for defining TP, FN, and FP are adapted accordingly.
A TP is recorded if the missing rules and bypass paths
reported by GoAT-X, once remediated, would prevent relevant
vulnerabilities in that project. An FP is recorded if GoAT-X
reports non-existent issues (e.g., proposes an incorrect missing
rule or an invalid bypass path). An FN is recorded if GoAT-
X fails to identify the critical missing rules or bypasses that
are the root cause of the known vulnerabilities. All generated
reports were then manually audited by our security experts to
determine the final results.
As delineated in Table IV, our evaluation involves a com-
parative analysis with several state-of-the-art tools. We strictly
control for experimental variables by configuring GPTScan
and SmartInv with the same underlying model (Gemini-
2.5-Flash) and input nodes as GoAT-X. For SmartAxe,
whose open-source implementation is incomplete, we adopt a
literature-based comparison; this approach is methodologically
sound as our evaluation benchmark encompasses the projects
analyzed in their original work, ensuring a valid and direct
comparison of detection performance. Notably, PropertyGPT
is excluded due to its lack of cross-chain semantics and
specialized training datasets.
To further assess the necessity of GoAT-X’s layered design
and iterative reasoning process, we introduce two simplified
ablation baselines: (1) Direct-Audit, where the LLM performs
a zero-shot cross-chain audit on the extracted code nodes,
and (2) Single-Step Analysis, where the LLM attempts to
synthesize parameter mapping, rule checking, and bypass
identification in a single pass without iterative refinement.
The comparative results are summarized in Table V and
Table VI. Overall, the evaluation demonstrates the limitations
of existing tools when applied to cross-chain vulnerability
analysis. As shown in Table V, GoAT-X significantly outper-
forms all baselines, achieving a Recall of 0.95, a Precision
of 0.83, and an F1-score of 0.88. In contrast, the LLM-
based auditors SmartInv and GPTScan perform poorly, with
F1-scores of 0.24 and 0.26, respectively. GPTScan’s perfect
Precision is a byproduct of its extremely low Recall (0.15),
indicating that most critical issues remain undetected.

11
TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF BASELINES AND EXPERIMENTAL CONFIGURATIONS.
Tool
Type
X-chain*
Avail.
Comparison Strategy
GoAT-X
Hybrid
✓
✓
Main Evaluation
GPTScan [37]
Hybrid
×
✓
Direct Execution†
SmartInv [13]
LLM
×
✓
Direct Execution†
SmartAxe [7]
Static
✓
×
Literature-based
PropertyGPT [12]
Hybrid
×
×
Excluded (Incompatible)
*X-chain: Cross-chain Focus; †Executed using Gemini-2.5-Flash.
While SmartAxe reports competitive results in isolated
settings, it still underperforms GoAT-X, reflecting the inherent
difficulty static analysis faces in resolving cross-chain business
logic and state dependencies. Moreover, unlike low-level alerts
produced by static analyzers, GoAT-X generates structured
natural-language reports that improve the interpretability and
actionability of audit results.
The baselines further highlight the necessity of GoAT-X’s
hierarchical decomposition and iterative reasoning strategy.
Even when provided with the same extracted cross-chain logic,
both Direct-Audit and Single-Step Analysis fail to achieve
reliable detection. This confirms that neither coarse-grained
code extraction nor single-pass reasoning is sufficient; precise
data-flow slicing and decomposed reasoning are essential for
effective cross-chain vulnerability detection.
To understand the boundaries of our framework, we ana-
lyzed the single False Negative case observed in the Allbridge
project. The vulnerability in Allbridge stemmed from a flash
loan attack caused by insufficient slippage protection. Our
analysis revealed that the project did not use explicit state
variables for slippage checks; instead, it relied on implicit
calculations via auxiliary functions (e.g., getY). This implicit
data flow obscured the semantic link between the calculation
logic and the concept of “slippage”, preventing the model
from inferring the necessary constraint. This case highlights
a persistent challenge in smart contract auditing: resolving
implicit semantic dependencies. Future work will address this
by enhancing the framework’s ability to track semantic data
flows or through targeted fine-tuning on implicit arithmetic
patterns.
Answer to RQ2: GoAT-X is highly effective, achiev-
ing a peak F1-score of 88% and detecting nearly
all vulnerabilities with a 95% Recall. Comparative
analysis confirms its state-of-the-art performance, as
it not only significantly outperforms existing LLM-
based auditors but also surpasses the specialized static
analysis tool.
C. RQ3:Analysis of Runtime Efficiency and Financial Cost
In RQ3, to evaluate the efficiency and cost-effectiveness
of GoAT-X, we conducted detailed measurements for the
detection process of each project. We recorded the runtime
of each layer within the framework, as well as the number of
tokens consumed and the corresponding financial cost incurred
by the LLM Layers. The number of tokens per project is shown
in Figure 10, the layer-by-layer time consumption is presented
in Figure 11, and the final average results are summarized in
VII.
Fig. 10.
Input and output token counts for each project, plotted on a
logarithmic scale. In the legend, (x, y) denotes the number of input tokens
(x) and output tokens (y), respectively.
Fig. 11. Runtime of Each Layer in GoAT-X
These results demonstrate the strong cost-effectiveness of
our framework when analyzing large and complex cross-chain
codebases. By leveraging the static analysis layer to precisely
extract core cross-chain logic and parameter-specific data flow
slices, the framework substantially reduces the token consump-
tion required by large language models, thereby lowering both
financial cost and computational overhead.
In addition, the encoder-based pruning strategy eliminates,
on average, 3 branches per project that would otherwise
require validation by high-cost models, further reducing un-
necessary LLM invocations. With an average detection time
of approximately 317 seconds per project, the framework
achieves high runtime efficiency, making it well-suited for
deep, automated auditing of complex cross-chain systems.

12
TABLE V
THE TABLE SHOWS THE IDENTIFICATION RESULTS FOR EACH CROSS-CHAIN PROJECT WITH KNOWN VULNERABILITIES, WHERE THE SYMBOLS
REPRESENT THE FRAMEWORK’S OVERALL PERFORMANCE: INDICATES PERFECT DETECTION (TP); G
#INDICATES AN OVER-REPORT(TP + FP);
H
#INDICATES AN UNDER-REPORT(FN); AND #INDICATES A COMPLETE FAILURE(FN + FP).
Method
Allbridge
ChainSwap
HyperBridge
LIFI I
LIFI II
MeterPassPort
Multichain I
Multichain II
Nerve
Nomad
pNetwork
PolyNetwork
QBridge
Qubit
Ronin
Rubic
SocketGateway
Synapse
THORChain
XBridge
Smartlnv(Gemini)
#
#
#
G#
G
#
#
 
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
 
 
#
#
#
GPTScan(Gemini)
H#
H
#
H
#
 
H#
H#
H
#
H#
 
H
#
H
#
H
#
H
#
H#
H#
H#
H#
 
H#
H#
Direct-Audit
#
H#
H#
 
G#
#
H
#
H#
#
#
H#
#
G#
H
#
H#
 
G#
#
H#
#
Single-Step Analysis
#
#
H#
#
 
H#
#
H#
#
H#
 
 
H#
H
#
H
#
H
#
G
#
G#
 
H#
GoAT-X
H#
 
 
 
 
G#
 
 
G#
 
 
 
 
 
G#
 
 
G#
 
 
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF METHODS
Method
Recall
Precision
F1-score
SmartInv(Gemini)
0.25
0.23
0.24
GPTScan(Gemini)
0.15
1.00
0.26
SmartAxe
0.90
0.85
0.87
Direct-Audit
0.25
0.33
0.29
Single-Step Analysis
0.30
0.46
0.36
GoAT-X
0.95
0.83
0.88
TABLE VII
AVERAGE MEASUREMENT PER PROJECT
Method
Time
Input tokens
Output tokens
Costs
GoAT-X
317.02 s
62,208
8,543
$0.02
Answer to RQ3: At an average auditing overhead of
just $0.02 per project, GoAT-X proves to be highly
cost-effective. Concurrently, its average detection time
of approximately 317 seconds per project validates its
efficiency, making it a viable tool for offline security
analysis.
D. RQ4:Impact of GoAT-X
In RQ4, to evaluate GoAT-X’s efficacy in realistic scenarios,
we constructed a cross-chain wild dataset comprising 1,406
smart contracts from 12 open-source projects. We applied
GoAT-X to scan these projects and manually verified the
reported alerts. As summarized in Table VIII, the tool suc-
cessfully identified critical security hotspots where constraints
were either missing or potentially bypassable, demonstrating
its capability to uncover deep business logic risks in complex
environments.
We acknowledge that not all flagged risks correspond to
immediately exploitable vulnerabilities. In practice, some iden-
tified issues represent deviations from strict defensive pro-
gramming, such as relying on implicit compiler-level checks
(e.g., Solidity 0.8.0+ for overflow) rather than explicit valida-
tion. However, we argue that maintaining security redundancy
is crucial for cross-chain protocols, where minor oversights
can lead to catastrophic losses. GoAT-X operates as a strict
TABLE VIII
DETECTION RESULTS ON THE CROSS-CHAIN WILD DATASET
Category
#Alerts
#Confirmed
#FP
Precision
Missing Constraints
116
108
8
0.93
Constraint Bypass
12
9
3
0.75
Total
128
117
11
0.91
auditor, flagging these potential risks to ensure comprehensive
coverage. Below, we present two representative cases from our
findings (anonymized for security):
Case 1: As shown in Figure 12, the transition from withdraw
to the internal withdrawTo function validates the secret but
fails to check if the nonce has been consumed. This Missing
Constraint exposes the protocol to Replay Attacks, where an
attacker could potentially reuse a valid secret to drain funds
repeatedly.
Fig. 12. Instance of Missing Constraint
Case 2: As illustrated in Figure 13, GoAT-X identifies a
high-risk data flow in which user-supplied callData is for-
warded into a low-level call. Although the contract enforces
a whitelist on the function selector (i.e., the first four bytes
of the callData), the remaining arguments remain fully user-
controlled. This design introduces a fragile reliance on down-
stream validation: if subsequent checks are incomplete or
improperly implemented, an attacker may manipulate these
arguments to craft malformed external calls. GoAT-X correctly
flags this execution path as a critical validation bypass, as such
manipulation can directly enable unauthorized token transfers
and result in severe economic losses.

13
Fig. 13. Instance of Constraint Bypass
Answer to RQ4: GoAT-X demonstrated high preci-
sion in the wild dataset. Out of the total alerts, we
confirmed 108 instances of missing constraints and
9 valid bypass paths, proving its practical value in
identifying realistic threats.
VII. RELATED WORK
Cross-Chain Vulnerability Detection. Current research on
securing cross-chain bridges primarily follows two main ap-
proaches. The first is pre-deployment static analysis, which
operates at the bytecode level but suffers from a semantic gap,
where high-level business logic is obscured, making it difficult
to discern the intent behind key operations [7], [8]. The second
is post-deployment monitoring, which detects attacks in real-
time but is inherently reactive rather than preventative due to
the immutability of smart contracts [3], [19], [34].
GoAT-X transcends these limitations by operating directly
at the source-code level. It synergizes the precision of static
analysis with the semantic understanding of Large Language
Models, all of which is orchestrated by our formal verification
framework, to generate a detailed audit report that captures
high-level business logic.
Single-Chain Tools. Outside of cross-chain contexts, a variety
of automated tools have been developed to uncover vulnerabil-
ities in smart contracts. Symbolic execution frameworks, such
as Oyente [38], Osiris [39], Mythril [40], and Manticore [41],
explore all feasible program paths by substituting concrete
values with symbolic variables. Static analyzers like Slither
[25] and Surya [26] traverse the contract’s abstract syntax tree
to identify patterns indicative of bugs, while fuzzers such as
sFuzz [42] and ContractFuzzer [43] probe runtime behaviors
and execution traces for anomalous states.
Although these techniques do not directly address the chal-
lenges of cross-chain interactions, their core ideas are highly
relevant. In our method, we leverage the high efficiency and
precision of static analysis tools in our foundational layers to
construct detailed function call graphs and extract parameter-
specific data flows, which provide the essential grounded
context for our deeper analysis.
LLM-Driven Security Analysis for Smart Contract. Cur-
rent research in applying LLMs to this field spans several
directions, ranging from directly querying the LLM for rapid
code auditing [10], [11], to enhancing static analysis by using
the LLM to translate complex contract logic into a more
analyzable intermediate representation [37], [44], and employs
fine-tuning and in-context learning to automatically generate
and refine formal properties for new smart contracts. [12], [13].
Distinguishing itself from prior art focused on single-chain
analysis, GoAT-X is the first framework to leverage LLM for
the automated auditing of cross-chain transaction contracts,
with a design that is readily extensible to other code security
domains.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This work addresses a critical security gap in the multi-
chain ecosystem by introducing GoAT-X, a framework that
brings first-principles verification to cross-chain smart contract
codebases. Our study shows that effective automation of
complex audits depends not on scaling LLMs alone, but on
structuring and constraining their reasoning. GoAT-X achieves
this by grounding generative analysis in rigorous static slicing
and a formal verification framework, while leveraging ensem-
ble reasoning and retrieval-augmented guidance to stabilize
inference and reduce spurious conclusions. Together, these
designs transform vulnerability discovery from an ad hoc,
stochastic process into a systematic and reproducible verifica-
tion workflow. Our evaluation confirms GoAT-X’s superiority,
achieving 95% coverage of vulnerable projects and uncover-
ing 117 confirmed risks in the wild with exceptional cost-
efficiency. This work establishes a scalable auditing paradigm
for blockchain security, with promising applicability to broader
code analysis domains and the sustainable development of the
DeFi ecosystem.