Title: Layer 2 Blockchains Simplified: A Survey of Vector Commitment Schemes, ZKP 
Frameworks, Layer-2 Data Structures and Verkle Trees. 
 
 
First Author: ​
​
​
​
​
Second Author: 
 Ekleen Kaur​​
​
​
​
 Marko Suvajdzic 
University of Florida, USA​
​
​
​
 University of Florida, USA 
ekleenkaur17@gmail.com​
​
​
​
marko@digitalworlds.ufl.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
Layer-2 (L2) protocols address the fundamental limitations of Layer-1 (L1) blockchains by offloading computation while 
anchoring trust to the parent chain. This architectural shift, while boosting throughput, introduces a new, complex security 
surface defined by off-chain components like sequencers, bridges, and data availability mechanisms. Prior literature[31][33] 
offers fragmented views of this risk. This paper presents the first unified, security-focused survey that rigorously maps L2 
architecture to its underlying cryptographic security. We dissect the technical progression from L1 primitives to the core of 
modern L2s, analyzing the security assumptions(Discrete Logarithm, Computational Diffie-Hellman, Bilinear Diffie-Hellman) of 
ZK frameworks (Groth16, Plonk) and their corresponding commitment schemes (KZG, IPA). We formalize a comprehensive L2 
threat model encompassing sequencer liveness, bridge exploits, and data-availability failures. This work serves as an accessible 
yet rigorous reference for researchers and developers to reason about L2 security from a deep crypto-mathematical perspective. 
Contents 
1. Introduction: Bridging L1 Foundations to L2 Security​
1.1 The L1 Bottleneck and The Necessity of Layer-2​
1.2 Blockchain Data Structures at a Glance​
1.3 Limitations of Prior L1-Focused Surveys: The Critical Lacuna​
1.4 Contributions of This Survey: A Security-First, Crypto-Holistic Approach 
 
2. 2 Layer 2 Solutions 
2.1 Sidechains 
2.2 Rollups 
2.2.1 Comparison of Rollup Architectures 
2.3 Plasma 
2.4 State Channels 
 
3. Hash Time Lock Contracts (HTLC) and Mass Exit Initiation 
3.1 HTLC Definition and Cryptographic Construction 
3.2 Mass Exit Initiation 
3.2.1 Block Withholding Attacks 
3.2.2 Mass Exit Initiation Transaction (MEIT) 
 
4 Beginning of Layer 2 Security 
4.1 Layer 2 Scaling solutions that are popular today 
4.2 Consensus in Layer-2 
4.3 Understanding Layer 2 through state-of-the-art cryptographic primitives 
4.3.1 Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP): Foundations 
4.3.2 Mathematical Computations behind ZKPs 
4.3.2.1 Proof Generation (by the Prover) 
4.3.2.2 Proof Verification (by the Verifier) 
 
5. Mathematical Computation Model of ZKPs 
5.1 Assumptions for ZKP Security 
5.1.1. Discrete Logarithm (DL) Assumption 
5.1.2. Computational Diffie-Hellman (CDH) Assumption 
 

5.2 Assumptions for Pairing-Based ZKPs 
5.2.1 Bilinear Diffie-Hellman (BDH) Assumption 
5.3 Pairing-Friendly Curves 
5.3.1 Comparison of Pairing-Friendly Curves 
 
6 Security Primitives of ZKPs in Layer 2 
6.1 R1CS as a Foundation for ZKPs 
6.2 Understanding Plonks improvements over Sonic: how Groth16 redefined universal SRS. 
6.3 "Plonkish" arithmetization 
6.4 How the Plonk Equation Works 
 
7 Computational analysis of various ZKP frameworks 
7.1 Comparison of ZKP Frameworks and Arithmetic Libraries 
 
8 Performance Improvement in commitment schemes curated by Ethereum 
8.1 Merkle Sum Tree 
8.1.1 Privacy Risks: Mitigated by STARKS 
8.2 Verkle trees for ethereum’s stateless future 
8.2.1 Merkle Particia Trie 
8.2.2 Verification Algorithm of Merkle Proofs 
8.2.3 Verkle Trees: How does ethereum makes a more efficient data structure with vector commitments? 
8.3 Table: Comparison of KZG and IPA Vector Commitment Schemes 
9 Limitations and Future work 
 
1 Introduction: Bridging L1 Foundations to L2 Security 
1.1 The L1 Bottleneck and The Necessity of Layer-2 
 
Blockchains achieve integrity, availability [59], and auditability [58] over a shared, decentralized ledger by 
ingeniously combining digital signatures, hash-linked data structures, and distributed consensus. However, the 
fundamental design choices of early Layer-1 (L1) networks aiming to optimize for security[74][75] and 
decentralization inevitably led to constraints in transaction throughput and cost. This challenge is universally framed 
by the Blockchain Trilemma, which posits that a network can only simultaneously achieve two of three core 
properties: scalability, decentralization, and security [31]. 
 
Scalability is a significant challenge for many of these blockchains. For Bitcoin, the limited block size and a 
10-minute block time create a bottleneck, leading to higher fees and slower transaction confirmations during periods 
of high demand. While Ethereum's move to PoS and its upcoming sharding upgrades explained in the later sections, 
aim to improve throughput, the network still faces congestion issues. In contrast, chains like Solana and Algorand 
were designed from the ground up for high throughput and low latency, mitigating scalability concerns by using 
more advanced consensus mechanisms and data structures. 
To understand the L1 bottleneck and the foundation upon which L2s are built, it is necessary to examine the core 
components that define the L1's state model and performance. The efficiency of L1 architectures is measured by 
metrics like Transactions per Byte (Tx/B) and Time Relay (the time for a block to propagate to 98% of the 
network), as a faster propagation time reduces the likelihood of network splits and orphaned blocks. Despite 
variations in consensus and data handling, L1s share inherent limitations in block propagation and transaction 
throughput, creating a critical demand for scaling solutions. 
The differing L1 approaches to state and transaction management are codified in their core data structures, as 
summarized below. 
1.2 Blockchain Data Structures at a Glance 
 

 
Sno 
Blockchain 
Core Data 
Structure 
Explanation 
1 
Bitcoin 
Unspent 
Transaction 
Output (UTXO) 
Model 
Bitcoin doesn't track account balances directly. Instead, it uses UTXOs, which 
are the digital equivalent of physical change. When a transaction occurs, the 
system consumes existing UTXOs as inputs and creates new UTXOs as 
outputs for the recipient and any change returning to the sender. A user's 
balance is the sum of all UTXOs they can spend. 
2 
Ethereum 
Merkle Patricia 
Trie 
The first application of Merkle proofs was used in Bitcoin, it was created and 
described by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009[50]. Ethereum uses an 
account-based model, where each account has a state (balance, nonce, 
storage, and code hash). This "world state" is stored in a complex data 
structure called a Merkle Patricia Trie (MPT). The MPT is a combination of a 
Merkle tree (for cryptographic integrity) and a Patricia trie (a compressed 
prefix tree for efficiency). This structure allows for the quick and verifiable 
lookup of any account's state, as each block header includes a hash of the 
MPT's root.[47]. 
3 
Cardano 
Extended UTXO 
(EUTXO) Model 
Cardano's model is an evolution of Bitcoin's UTXO. The EUTXO model 
extends the basic UTXO by allowing additional data to be attached to outputs, 
which enables more complex logic and the execution of smart contracts. This 
provides a more secure and predictable environment for smart contracts, as 
the validity of a transaction can be checked offline before it is submitted to the 
network.[46][48] 
4 
Solana 
Append-Only 
Ledger (PoH) 
Solana's data structure is designed for high throughput. It uses a Proof of 
History (PoH), which is a verifiable[52], cryptographic clock that creates a 
historical record of events, using sequential verifiable delay functions[53][54]. 
Transactions are processed in a continuous, append-only ledger, and PoH 
acts as a time-stamping function that allows validators to quickly process and 
finalize blocks without needing to wait for a global consensus on time. This is 
combined with the Tower BFT consensus mechanism.[51] 
5 
Algorand 
Pure Proof of 
Stake (PPoS) 
The first application of Merkle proofs was used in Bitcoin, it was created and 
described by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009[50]. Ethereum uses an 
account-based model, where each account has a state (balance, nonce, 
storage, and code hash). This "world state" is stored in a complex data 
structure called a Merkle Patricia Trie (MPT). The MPT is a combination of a 
Merkle tree (for cryptographic integrity) and a Patricia trie (a compressed 
prefix tree for efficiency). This structure allows for the quick and verifiable 
lookup of any account's state, as each block header includes a hash of the 
MPT's root.[47]. 
6 
Polkadot 
Relay Chain & 
Parachains 
Polkadot is a sharded blockchain, not a single chain. Its core data structure 
consists of the Relay Chain and multiple Parachains. The Relay Chain is the 
central hub that provides shared security and facilitates communication 
between the Parachains. The Parachains are independent blockchains with 
their own data structures, optimized for specific use cases. The data on these 
separate chains is "finalized" by the Relay Chain, creating a system of 
heterogeneous sharding.[56][57] 
 
In response to the L1 bottleneck, Layer-2 (L2) solutions emerged to relocate computation and state transitions 
off-chain. Rollups, in particular, promise L1-equivalent security with higher throughput by posting transaction data 
or state commitments back to the L1. Correctness is proven via Fraud Proofs (economic incentives, as in Optimistic 
Rollups) or Validity Proofs (zero-knowledge cryptography, as in ZK-Rollups). However, this delegation of execution 
reconfigures the established L1 security model. While prior surveys [33] established a strong foundation in general 
blockchain primitives, L2 designs interpose novel, cross-domain components that create distinct, unaddressed failure 
modes. These new elements include: 
 
 

●​
Sequencers: Centralized or shared entities that order transactions, affecting liveness, censorship, and 
Maximal Extractable Value (MEV). 
●​
Data Availability (DA) Layers: Off-chain services that host transaction data; trust assumptions about these 
layers directly impact a user’s ability to refute or verify the L2 state. 
●​
Proof Systems: The distinction between Fraud Proofs and Validity Proofs introduces unique security 
risks, such as coverage gaps or cryptographic soundness failures. 
●​
Bridges: Protocols governing L2↔L1 and L2↔L2 value transfer; design choices determine the potential 
for catastrophic exploits. 
 
1.3 Limitations of Prior L1-Focused Surveys: The Critical Lacuna 
 
While existing literature provides foundational L1 surveys [33] and high-level architectural comparisons, a critical 
and irrefutable lacuna exists in the academic discourse: there is no single, holistic artifact that traces the historical 
progression and cryptographic pivot from L1 primitives to the advanced mathematical security models underpinning 
modern L2 solutions. 
 
Current surveys fail the reader by removing the essential groundwork: they do not explain why expensive, 
quantum-safe mathematical encryptions were adopted, what cryptographic assumptions were made, and how 
researchers pivoted from one curve to the next. Specifically, no existing publication provides the accessible yet 
rigorous narrative required for a reader only aware of L1 to fully grasp the deep, mathematical security of L2s from 
the adoption of elliptic curves as a pivotal verification scheme to the transition from MNT curves to the 
industry-wide accepted BLS 128-bit security curves. Our motivation to write this paper stems directly from the 
absence of a published work across academic journals, that traces this history and breaks it down to defend the L2 
security model. We analyzed existing literature from google scholar, elseiver, technical preprints (IACR, arxiv), and 
prominent blogs(medium, ethereum). 
 
1.4 Contributions of This Survey: A Security-First, Crypto-Holistic Approach 
 
We provide a focused, security-first survey of L2 systems, deliberately building on prior L1-centric surveys to keep 
the exposition accessible while sharpening the analysis around L2-specific systems and mathematical models. We 
demonstrate how their inherent strong mathematical guarantees constitute the foundational security model for L2 
decentralized architectures. Our core contributions introduce novel artifacts and analysis absent in existing literature: 
 
●​
Architecture and Threat Model for New-Age L2s: We break down the architectural models and assemble 
an end-to-end security model for cutting-edge L2 solutions, including Arbitrum, EigenLayer, Optimism, 
and Starknet, classifying modes across sequencer operations, bridge architectures, and Data Availability 
trust assumptions. 
●​
Systematic Cryptographic Foundation & Assumption Mapping: We detail the mathematical security of 
L2s by providing a clear definition and explanation of the polynomial commitment schemes that form the 
backbone of L2 security. Unlike existing literature, we explicitly define the fundamental cryptographic 
assumptions that underpin ZKPs, clarifying potential pitfalls for non-mathematical readers. 
●​
Tracing Elliptic Curve Adoption and State-of-the-Art Cryptanalysis: We are the first survey to explain 
the critical transition of pairing-friendly curves in the L2 space, detailing the necessary pivot from MNT 
curves to BLS 128-bit security curves and why this cryptographic choice is pivotal for industry-wide 
verification standards. 
●​
Comparative ZKP Library Benchmarking: We detail the security primitives in industry-used ZKP 
libraries (Groth16, Sonic, Plonk, and STARKs), providing a comprehensive, comparative analysis based on 
baseline performance benchmarks and a deep-dive into the underlying hardware limitations of each 
scheme, a critical factor currently unaddressed by L2 surveys. 
 

●​
Commitment Scheme Benchmarking: Analytical comparison of KZG and IPA-based commitments and 
their role in scalable data structures such as Merkle and Verkle trees 
●​
State-of-the-Art Data Structure Scalability: We provide the first comprehensive survey discussion that 
maps L1 data structures—including Ethereum's Merkle Patricia Tries (MPT) and Merkle proofs—to the 
next generation of cryptographic scalability with Verkle Trees. We break down the Verkle tree data 
structure and its role in achieving Ethereum's stateless goal, an artifact currently confined only to 
implementation papers. 
 
2 Layer 2 Solutions 
To address the scalability limitations of Layer 1 (L1) blockchains, various off-chain solutions, collectively known as 
Layer 2[30] (L2), have been developed. These solutions aim to handle a large volume of transactions off the main 
chain while still leveraging its security. 
2.1 Sidechains 
A sidechain in decentralized scientific community is treated as an independent blockchain that functions parallel to 
the main chain. It has its own consensus mechanism and can use different rules than the main chain, offering a high 
degree of flexibility and scalability. For example, the Polygon network operates as a sidechain to Ethereum. One of 
the primary advantages of sidechains is their ability to execute transactions at a much faster rate with lower fees. 
However, their security is independent of the main chain, which can introduce vulnerabilities. 
2.2 Rollups 
Rollups, the dominant L2 scaling solution, are categorized by their underlying security mechanism: Optimistic 
Rollups (ORs) and Zero-Knowledge Rollups (ZKRs). While both achieve scalability by executing transactions 
off-chain, their fundamental security and finality guarantees are diametrically opposed, creating a critical trade-off 
for L2 design. 
ORs operate under an "innocent until proven guilty" assumption: the Sequencer posts a new state root to L1, and it is 
assumed valid by default. The security of an OR relies on Fraud Proofs, a game-theoretic mechanism where anyone 
can challenge an invalid state transition during a fixed Challenge Period (typically 7 days). This economic incentive 
structure, enforced by slashing a malicious Sequencer's staked collateral, is the core security mechanism of ORs. 
In contrast, ZKRs operate under a "guilty until proven innocent" model. They use Validity Proofs cryptographic, 
mathematically certain proofs to demonstrate that all off-chain transactions are valid before the new state root is 
accepted by the L1. The L1 contract instantly verifies this proof, not the original computation. This cryptographic 
certainty removes the need for a delay period. The differences are summarized below: 
2.2.1 Comparison of Rollup Architectures 
Feature 
Optimistic Rollups (OR) 
ZK-Rollups(ZKR) 
Validation Method 
Assumed valid ("innocent until proven 
guilty"). 
Proven valid by cryptography ("guilty until 
proven innocent"). 
Security Mechanism 
Fraud Proofs (Game Theory/Economic 
Incentive) 
Validity Proofs 
(Mathematical/Cryptographic Guarantee) 
Withdrawal Time 
Delayed (e.g., approx 7 days) due to the 
challenge period. 
Instant (as soon as the proof is verified on 
L1). 
 

L1 Execution 
Re-executes only the disputed step of a 
transaction during a challenge. 
Verifies the validity proof for the entire 
batch. 
EVM Compatibility 
Typically high (easy to migrate existing L1 
smart contracts). 
Historically complex, but rapidly improving 
with zkEVMs. 
2.3 Plasma 
 Plasma uses a hierarchy of child chains that periodically commit a Merkle root of their state to the main chain. This 
structure reduces the amount of data stored on the L1 and allows for high-frequency transactions. A key security 
challenge for Plasma is the "mass exit" problem explained in section 5, where a malicious operator can hold funds 
hostage, forcing users to initiate an exit transaction to the main chain to retrieve their assets. 
2.4 State Channels: State channels, such as the Lightning Network for Bitcoin and the Raiden Network for 
Ethereum, enable users to conduct multiple transactions off-chain. Only the opening and closing transactions are 
recorded on the main chain, while all intermediate transactions occur privately between participants. This provides a 
solution for micropayments, as it significantly reduces transaction fees. Security is maintained through a Hash Time 
Lock Contract [HTLC], which ensures that participants can't cheat by broadcasting an old state of the channel. 
3. Hash Time Lock Contract (HTLC) & Mass Exit Initiation 
3.1 HTLC Definition and Cryptographic Construction 
An HTLC is a conditional payment mechanism that uses a hashlock and a timelock to enforce a multi-hop payment. 
It works as follows: 
1.​ A sender creates a secret (pre-image) and provides its hash to the receiver. 
2.​ The sender locks the funds with a hashlock, requiring the receiver to reveal the pre-image to claim the 
funds. 
3.​ A timelock is also set, giving the receiver a specific amount of time to claim the funds. If the receiver fails 
to claim the funds before the deadline, the payment is returned to the sender. 
Encryption Scheme: H(R)=P 
●​
H here is represented as a cryptographic hash function (like: SHA-256). 
●​
R is the secret preimage. 
●​
P is the public hash value. 
HTLCs are crucial for enabling trustless cross-chain transactions and routing payments through a network of state 
channels. This process ensures that the payment is either completed or returned, eliminating the need for trust 
between parties and making it ideal for multi-hop payments in networks like the Lightning Network. Companies like 
ACINQ and Lightning Labs use HTLCs to facilitate off-chain payments. HTLC also aids as the technical backbone 
for many atomic swaps and trustless transactions. 
3.2 Mass Exit Initiation 
3.2.1 Block Withholding Attacks 
Mass exit initiation[60] is a defense against block withholding attack(BWA)[28][29] & a major challenge for 
Plasma[62][63]. This occurs when a child chain's validators fail to publish new blocks. The chain is assumed to be 
 

byzantine, if a malicious operator withholds a block, users must initiate a mass exit from the plasma chain to retrieve 
their funds. This process can be slow- in the order of weeks and expensive. The operator’s role is to verify: 
●​
Plasma state a block ahead of BWA 
●​
Contruct exit transaction to gather signatures from all users. 
●​
Broadcast mass exit initiation transaction MEIT to the root chain. 
3.2.2 Mass Exit Initiation Transaction (MEIT) 
This MEIT includes a complete bitmap of the state being withdrawn, allowing observers to challenge any invalid 
claims. This type of attack, particularly possible on the Lightning Network, where an adversary forces many honest 
users to close their payment channels simultaneously by making a high volume of malicious transactions. This 
creates network congestion on the L1 chain, causing delays and forcing users to pay exorbitant fees to broadcast 
their channel-closing transactions before the timelock expires. 
4 Beginning of Layer 2 Security 
4.1 Layer 2 Scaling solutions that are popular today 
While Layer-1 (L1) blockchains like the above run their own consensus to agree on transaction order and block 
validity, Layer-2 (L2) systems inherit security from an underlying L1 but use different mechanisms to order 
transactions and prove correctness. 
●​
Arbitrum[64] (Optimistic Rollup)​
Posts transaction batches to Ethereum and assumes them valid unless challenged via a fraud-proof. 
Ethereum’s PoS finality anchors security, but transaction ordering is controlled by an L2 sequencer 
(currently centralized).​
 
●​
Optimism[65] (Optimistic Rollup)​
 Similar to Arbitrum, with a challenge window for fraud-proofs. Security relies on Ethereum PoS for 
dispute resolution, but ordering and availability are dependent on the L2’s sequencer and data-posting 
strategy.​
 
●​
zkSync[66][67], StarkNet[68] (ZK-Rollups)​
 Post validity proofs to Ethereum. Ethereum’s PoS verifies these succinct proofs, ensuring state correctness. 
Sequencers order transactions off-chain but cannot create invalid state transitions without failing proof 
verification.​
 
EigenLayer[69] (Restaking Layer)​
Not strictly a rollup, but a mechanism for shared cryptographic security. This protocol, exemplified by EigenLayer, 
allows Ethereum Proof-of-Stake (PoS) validators to "restake" their already-staked ETH collateral to provide security 
to additional Actively Validated Services (AVSs), such as decentralized oracles, data availability layers, 
sidechains[61] or bridges. This mechanism creates pooled cryptoeconomic security, where the validator's capital is 
exposed to new slashing conditions imposed by the AVS. The security model ensures that the cost of corruption 
(CoC) for attacking multiple AVSs must remain prohibitively greater than the profit of corruption (PoC), as a 
misbehaving operator faces a cascading forfeiture of their staked position across both the AVS and the main 
Ethereum chain. The system operates as an open marketplace where validators selectively allocate their restaked 
capital based on the AVS's specific yield and penalty parameters. 
 

4.2 Consensus in Layer-2​
In L2s, consensus on transaction ordering is often centralized (single sequencer) or semi-decentralized, and disputes 
are resolved via the L1. This separation means L2 throughput can be much higher, but liveness and censorship 
resistance depend on sequencer design, while correctness depends on the integrity of proofs and availability of data. 
Consensus & Security Comparison: L1 vs L2 
 
Blockchain / 
Protocol 
Consensus 
Mechanism 
Finality Time 
Max Theoretical 
Throughput 
Security 
Dependency 
Key Trade-offs 
Bitcoin 
Proof of Work 
(PoW) 
~60 min (6 
blocks) 
~7 TPS 
Secured by global 
mining hashpower 
Extremely secure but 
energy-intensive, low throughput 
Ethereum 
Proof of Stake 
(PoS, 
post-Merge) 
~15 min[42] 
~178.6 TPS 
Secured by staked 
ETH 
Energy efficient, scalable base for 
rollups 
Algorand 
Pure Proof of 
Stake (PPoS) 
~2.82sec[43] 
~25,000 TPS 
Staked ALGO, 
random committee 
selection 
Fast, strong finality, limited 
adoption 
Cardano 
Ouroboros PoS 
~2 minute[44] 
~18.02 TPS 
Staked ADA, 
probabilistic leader 
election 
Formal proofs of security, slower 
practical throughput 
Polkadot 
Nominated PoS 
(NPoS) with 
BABE + 
GRANDPA 
~30 sec 
~100,000 TPS 
across parachains 
DOT stake, 
validator elections 
Flexible, shared security, 
complexity in cross-chain 
validation 
Near 
PoS 
~0.6 sec 
~16,000 TPS 
NEAR stake, 
validator elections 
NightShade Sharding for 
mainstream adoption, high speed 
and low costs. 
Polygon(L2) 
PoS 
~5 sec 
~714.3 TPS 
Staked Native 
Token POL for 
Lower fees 
Fast Finality and high security 
through ZkEVM, trust assumption 
consider possible validator 
collusion. 
Solana 
PoS + Proof of 
History (PoH) 
~12.8 sec 
~65,000 TPS 
Validator set, 
staked SOL 
High throughput, vulnerable to 
outages and centralization. 
Arbitrium(L2) 
Optimistic Rollup 
(fraud proofs on 
Ethereum) 
7 days (challenge 
window) for full 
finality using 
Bounded 
Liquidity 
Delay[45] 
~40,000 TPS 
(off-chain) 
Token ARB, 
Inherits Ethereum 
PoS; relies on 
sequencer & 
fraud-proof 
liveness 
High throughput, but sequencer is 
centralized today. 
Optimism(L2) 
Optimistic Rollup 
(fraud proofs on 
Ethereum) 
7 days 
~714.3 TPS 
Ethereum PoS 
Similar to Arbitrum, relies on 
sequencer centralization. 
zkSync/ 
Starknet(L2) 
ZK-Rollup 
(validity proofs) 
2h 
~992 TPS (scales 
with proving 
efficiency) 
Ethereum PoS + 
ZK proof 
soundness 
Strong security, heavy 
cryptographic overhead. 
Eigen Layer 
(middleware) 
Restaking 
(extension of 
Ethereum PoS) 
Inherits Ethereum 
finality 
Varies (depends 
on service) 
Ethereum PoS + 
additional slashing 
conditions. 
Extends security to other 
protocols, introduces correlated 
slashing risk. 
 
 

4.3 Understanding Layer 2 through state-of-the-art cryptographic primitives 
4.3.1 Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP): Foundations 
A zero-knowledge proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic method where one party, the prover, can convince another party, 
the verifier, that a statement is true without revealing any information beyond the statement's validity. ZKPs must 
satisfy three properties: 
1.​
Completeness: An honest prover can always convince the verifier if the statement is true. 
2.​
Soundness: We define soundness given a dishonest prover cannot convince to a given verifier that a chosen 
statement is indeed false. 
3.​
Zero-Knowledge: The verifier learns nothing about the secret information beyond the truth of the 
statement. 
In the scientific domain of blockchain, ZKPs are particularly useful for enhancing privacy and scalability, allowing 
for confidential transactions and the compression of large batches of off-chain transactions into a single, verifiable 
proof. Key steps to verify a zero knowledge proof include.[49] 
1.​ Proof generation – a cryptographic ZKP is generated, showing that the new state (balances, contracts, etc.) 
is valid according to blockchain’s rules.​
 
2.​ On-chain verification – the ZKP is submitted to onchain L1, PoS validators only need to check the small 
proof, not re-run every transaction.​
 
3.​ Security guarantee – if the proof verifies, it is mathematically impossible for invalid state transitions to be 
probabilistically possible. 
4.3.2 Mathematical Computations behind ZKPs 
The magic of ZKPs lies in a series of mathematical steps that transform a large, complex computation into a simple, 
verifiable proof. This process can be broken down into two main phases: Proof Generation and Proof Verification. 
4.3.2.1 Proof Generation (by the Prover) 
The prover's task is to take a statement and its private "witness" (the secret information) and encode them into a 
mathematical object, typically a polynomial. This is the process of arithmetization. The prover takes the 
computation (often represented as an arithmetic circuit) and converts it into a series of polynomial equations. For the 
proof to be valid, all these equations must hold true. 
For example, to prove knowledge of a secret number x such that x³ + 5 = 130, the prover first creates a circuit, which 
is then converted into a polynomial identity, such as P(x) = x³ + 5 - 130. The prover's goal is to prove they know a 
value of x for which this polynomial equals zero. 
The prover then uses a Polynomial Commitment Scheme (PCS) to "commit" to this polynomial. A PCS is a 
cryptographic primitive that allows the prover to create a short, non-interactive hash-like representation of the 
polynomial. This commitment is binding (the prover can't change the polynomial later) and hiding (the verifier 
can't learn the polynomial's coefficients from the commitment alone). The most common PCS used in pairing-based 
ZKPs is [KZG] (Kate-Zaverucha-Goldberg), which leverages elliptic curve pairings[SEC1][SEC2][32]. 
4.3.2.2 Proof Verification (by the Verifier) 
 

The verifier receives the proof, which includes the polynomial commitment and some additional information (the 
"witness"). The verifier does not need to re-run the original computation. Instead, they need to check a single, 
succinct pairing equation. 
The core of the verification is to ensure that the polynomial P(x) from the prover's side indeed evaluates to zero at 
the correct point. Using the properties of pairings, the verifier can perform a single check of the form e(A, B) = e(C, 
D). This pairing check essentially verifies that the polynomial identity holds true at a randomly chosen point. The 
bilinear property of pairings is what makes this check possible. 
A pairing is a function e(P, Q) that takes two points on elliptic curves (P from a group G1 and Q from a group G2) 
and maps them to a single element in a new group GT. It has the property that e(aP, bQ) = e(P, Q)ᵃᵇ (more details in 
the next section), which allows the verification process to check multiplicative relationships between values that are 
"hidden" in the elliptic curve points. 
By combining the KZG commitment with pairings based functions, the verifier can be convinced that the prover 
knew the correct secret without ever learning what the secret was. The final proof is just a few elliptic curve points 
and field elements, making it extremely compact and easy to verify, regardless of the complexity of the original 
computation. 
SNARKS were built on ZKP, which assumes an NP relation R, between given a witness w, and an instance x. i.e. 
(x,w) ∈ R . this relation is verifiable in polynomial time by a Turing machine. 3 stages of SNARK based ZKP are- 
●​
Setup(pp) → (pk, vk) Setup Phase: Here input pp are public parameters, used for compute. The output 
generates proving and verification keys pk and vk, respectively. 
●​
Prove(pk,𝑥,𝑤) → 𝜋. Proof Generation: Inputs required to generate proof, given the proving key pk, the 
witness 𝑤, and the instance 𝑥, using the assumption mentioned above, to output a proof 𝜋. 
●​
 Verify(vk,𝑥,𝜋) → 0/1. Verification: To verify the proof generated in step 2, given verification key vk, the 
instance 𝑥, and the proof 𝜋 as input, output is a binary- 1 if the proof is valid and 0 otherwise.​
 ​
 
5. Mathematical Computation Model of ZKPs​
5.1 Assumptions for ZKP Security​
5.1.1. Discrete Logarithm (DL) Assumption 
The Discrete Logarithm (DL) problem is a fundamental assumption in modern cryptography. Given a base 
element g and a point h in a cyclic group, it's computationally infeasible to find the integer x such that gˣ = h. This 
assumption underpins the security of many elliptic curve cryptosystems and is essential for the "hiding" property of 
polynomial commitment schemes. In simpler terms, it's easy to perform multiplication on the curve (x * G = X), but 
it's extremely difficult to reverse the process and find x from X and G. 
5.1.2. Computational Diffie-Hellman (CDH) Assumption 
The Computational Diffie-Hellman (CDH) assumption[38] is a more specific variant of the DL problem. It posits 
that given a generator G and two points aG and bG (where a and b are unknown scalars), it is computationally 
infeasible to compute abG. This assumption is critical for the "binding" property of many commitment schemes. It 
ensures that a prover cannot forge a valid proof by manipulating the commitment. 
5.2 Assumptions for Pairing-Based ZKPs 
 

Pairing-based ZKPs, which are common for their efficiency, rely on an additional, stronger assumption related to 
bilinear pairings. 
5.2.1 Bilinear Diffie-Hellman (BDH) Assumption 
The Bilinear Diffie-Hellman (BDH) assumption is central to the security of pairing-based schemes like [KZG]. It 
states that given a generator P and the points aP, bP, and cP (where a, b, and c are unknown scalars), it is 
computationally infeasible to compute the value e(P, P)ᵃᵇᶜ. This assumption allows the verifier to check the 
relationship between multiple committed polynomials with a single pairing check. The "bilinearity" property of the 
pairing function e(aP, bQ) = e(P, Q)ᵃᵇ is a powerful tool for these proofs, and the BDH assumption ensures that this 
tool can't be exploited by a malicious prover. 
5.3 Pairing-Friendly Curves 
Zero-Knowledge Proofs, particularly the most efficient forms like zk-SNARKs[23] (Zero-Knowledge Succinct 
Non-Interactive Arguments of Knowledge), heavily rely on pairing-friendly elliptic curves[22]. These curves are 
special because they support a mathematical operation like bilinear pairing[36][37], allowing powerful 
cryptographic checks: it enables the verifier to check the relationship between multiple cryptographic commitments 
or keys in a single operation, which is crucial for the succinctness and efficiency of the proof. 
5.3.1 Comparison of Pairing-Friendly Curves 
 
Curve 
Key Properties 
Improvement Over Previous Curve 
MNT Curves 
Type: Early family of curves, with embedding degrees 3, 
4, or 6. Use: Pioneering in pairing-based cryptography. 
The MNT family was a foundational step in finding curves suitable for 
pairings, but they had limited security and flexibility. 
BLS12-381 
Type: A Barreto-Lynn-Scott (BLS) curve with an 
embedding degree of 12. Key Parameters: A 381-bit 
prime field, and a 255-bit subgroup order. Use: Widely 
adopted in ZKPs (e.g., Zcash, Ethereum 2.0). 
Security & Efficiency: BLS12-381 provides a more robust 128-bit 
security level, which was a significant improvement over the older 
BN254 curves that were found to have compromised security. Its low 
Hamming weight parameters optimize pairing computations, and its 
subgroup order is perfectly sized for 64-bit machine arithmetic, making 
it highly performant for zk-SNARKs. 
BLS12-461 
Type: Another BLS curve with an embedding degree of 
12. Key Parameters: A 461-bit prime field. Use: 
Proposed as a more secure alternative to BLS12-381. 
Increased Security Margin: BLS12-461 provides a higher security 
margin, targeting a more conservative 128-bit security level against 
advanced cryptanalytic attacks that may threaten curves with smaller 
field sizes. 
BN-462 
Type: A Barreto-Naehrig (BN) curve. Key Parameters: A 
462-bit prime field. Use: A competitor to the BLS12-461. 
Alternative Construction: BN curves offer a different approach to 
constructing pairing-friendly curves. BN-462 is a competitor to the 
BLS12-461 with equivalent security. The choice between them often 
comes down to specific implementation details and performance 
characteristics for a given application. 
BLS48-286 
Type: A BLS curve with a high embedding degree of 48. 
Key Parameters: A 286-bit prime field. Use: Research 
and advanced protocols. 
Improved Prover Time: By using a higher embedding degree, 
BLS48-286 can sometimes offer better performance for the prover, as 
some cryptographic operations become more efficient at the cost of a 
larger prime field. This makes it a potential candidate for future proof 
systems. 
The curve currently most widely used in ZKP computations is BLS12-381[21][39]. It is employed in the final proof 
verification step. During this step, the verifier receives a succinct proof from the prover and performs a pairing 
check. The pairing operation verifies the integrity of the complex polynomial equations that represent the 
computation performed by the prover. It essentially allows the verifier to confirm that the prover correctly 
transformed the input data (the "witness") into the final proof without revealing the witness itself. This single, 
 

efficient pairing check is what makes zk-SNARKs so powerful and fast to verify, regardless of the complexity of the 
original computation. 
While the Fotiadis–Martindale[17], Freeman–Scott–Teske[18][19], and Kachisa–Schaefer–Scott (KSS)[20] curves 
are also 128-bit security level pairing-friendly curves[16], they can be used for cryptographic applications, but they 
are not as widely adopted as BLS12-381 due to a variety of reasons. The primary reason is that BLS12-381 has 
become a de facto standard in the ZKP and blockchain space, particularly in protocols like Zcash[26], Ethereum, and 
Filecoin. This widespread adoption is due to its optimal balance of security, efficiency, and implementation 
properties. 
Other curves, while theoretically sound, often have characteristics that make them less practical for broad use. For 
example, some may offer slightly better security but are much less efficient to compute. Others might be harder to 
implement or lack the "low Hamming weight" property of the BLS12-381 parameter, which is a key factor in 
speeding up the Miller loop, a critical step in pairing computations. The cryptographic community, particularly in 
the blockchain space, has largely converged on a few well-tested and highly-optimized curves to ensure 
interoperability and security. 
6 Security Primitives of ZKPs in Layer 2 
ZKPs guarantee L2 security by providing mathematical certainty that only valid state updates are committed to 
Ethereum, even if the L2 operator is untrusted. This gives ZK-Rollups stronger security assurances and faster 
finality compared to Optimistic Rollups. Some Layer-2 solutions relying on ZKPs are zkSync or StarkNet use 
ZK-Rollups. 
●​
No trust in sequencers: Even if the L2 sequencer is malicious, they cannot submit invalid state — the 
proof would fail.​
 
●​
Finality speed: Once Ethereum accepts the proof, the L2 transactions are as final as an L1 transaction.​
 
●​
Data integrity: Users can reconstruct state from published data + proofs, ensuring no hidden manipulation. 
 
Understanding the technical details of ZKP algorithms, such as the trade-offs between different cryptographic curves 
and the impact of hardware optimizations, is crucial for grasping the promises of ZK-Rollups. These promise 
untrustworthy sequencers, immediate finality, and provable data integrity are not just theoretical beliefs; they are 
practical assurances built on the mathematical certainty provided by these underlying cryptographic primitives. 
Therefore, diving into benchmarks like R1CS and comparing various ZKP frameworks is essential. It provides 
concrete evidence of how different implementations deliver on the promised speed and security, allowing developers 
and users to critically evaluate which solutions truly live up to the Layer 2 vision. 
 
6.1 R1CS as a Foundation for ZKPs 
 
Rank-1 Constraint Systems (R1CS) remain one of the most widely used intermediate representations for 
zero-knowledge proofs, since they allow general computations to be expressed as algebraic constraints. Early 
benchmark studies (e.g., Spartan 2020[SPA]) showed how different proof systems scale with growing R1CS 
instance sizes, highlighting the trade-offs between interactive and non-interactive proof styles. Interactive proofs 
often incurred higher verification costs but maintained smaller proofs, while non-interactive SNARKs and NIZKs 
demonstrated succinct proofs with lower verifier overhead. Although these results are not the latest, they illustrate 
that R1CS complexity fundamentally shapes proving time, proof size, and verification efficiency—trends that 
continue to influence today’s proof systems and framework design. 
 

 
6.2 Understanding Plonks improvements over Sonic: how Groth16 redefined universal SRS. 
 
The trusted setup stage in a zkp generates a public, setup-dependent parameter required by pairing-friendly 
curves[Gro16] called a Structured Reference String(SRS). A term now preferred over Common Reference String 
(CRS). Historically, most zk-SNARKs required a trusted setup that produced an SRS specific to a single circuit or 
relation. This meant any change to the circuit required a new setup. The first key breakthrough was Groth et 
al.'s[GKM+] introduction of a universal and updatable SRS, allowing a single setup to support all circuits up to a 
bounded size, but this string scaled quadratically in size, making it impractical for large circuits. 
[Sonic] provided the first potentially practical zk-SNARK with a linear-size, universal, and continually updatable 
SRS, solving the quadratic-scaling issue of prior universal setups. However, the fully-succinct version of Sonic still 
had relatively high proof construction overheads. 
[PLONK] (Permutations over Lagrange-bases for Oecumenical Noninteractive arguments of Knowledge) 
improvised by introducing a universal SNARK with significantly lower prover running time (roughly 7.5 to 20 
times fewer group exponentiations than fully-succinct Sonic). Plonk is a modern zk-SNARK protocol that uses a 
fundamentally different arithmetization. 
6.3 "Plonkish" arithmetization 
PLONK introduced the "Plonkish" arithmetization, replacing R1CS with a system based on Custom Gates and a 
Permutation Argument. 
●​
Custom Gates: A single gate equation can be more complex than R1CS. This flexibility allows defining 
operations like cryptographic hashes or bitwise logic in one constraint, making circuits smaller and 
proving faster for certain operations (e.g., Pedersen Hash). 
●​
Permutation Argument: It uses a check based on the Grand Product Argument (an evolution of Sonic's 
technique) to ensure consistency of wires connecting different gates. 
Example of a Custom Gate Equation in PLONK arithmetization- QL​⋅a+QR​⋅b+QM​⋅a⋅b+QO​⋅c+QC​=0). 
This single equation defines the allowed operation for one row (or gate) in the circuit's execution trace. 
Variable 
Type 
Definition 
a,b,c 
Witness values 
These represent the wire values or signals (inputs and outputs) for a single gate in 
the circuit's execution trace. They are the values the Prover is trying to prove 
knowledge of. 
QL​,QR​,QM​,QO​,QC 
Selector Polynomials 
These are fixed, public constants chosen by the circuit designer (the 
compiler/trusted setup) for each gate. They are often referred to collectively as Q​. 
QL​,QR​ 
Left/Right Selectors 
They select the variables a and b for the linear terms. 
QM​ 
Multiplication Selector 
It selects the term a⋅b to enable a multiplication operation. 
QO 
Output Selector 
It selects the output variable c. (Note: In some definitions, c is the output of the 
gate and QO​ is sometimes QOUT​ or similar, and is often assigned a negative 
value to move it to the right side of the equation). 
QC 
Constant Selector 
It allows a constant to be added to the equation. 
6.4 How the Plonk Equation Works 
 

The equation is structured to be a generalized way to encode any quadratic (or degree-2) constraint, where all terms 
must sum to zero: 
●​
Linear Terms (Addition): QL​⋅a+QR​⋅b 
●​
Quadratic Term (Multiplication): QM​⋅a⋅b 
●​
Output Term: QO​⋅c 
●​
Constant Term: QC​ 
By setting the selector constants (Q​) appropriately for a specific gate, the circuit can perform any operation: 
1.​
Multiplication Gate (a⋅b=c): 
○​
Set QM​=1, QO​=−1, and all others to 0. 
○​
Equation becomes: (1⋅a⋅b)+(−1⋅c)=0⟹a⋅b=c. 
2.​
Addition Gate (a+b=c): 
○​
Set QL​=1, QR​=1, QO​=−1, and QM​=QC​=0. 
○​
Equation becomes: (1⋅a)+(1⋅b)+(−1⋅c)=0⟹a+b=c. 
3.​ Custom Gates: By assigning more complex values to the Q polynomials, PLONK can enforce 
higher-degree constraints or specialized operations (like checking if a variable is a boolean a∈{0,1}). 
The PLONK Prover must find values for a,b,c (the witness) such that for all rows in the circuit, this equation with 
row-specific public Q values is satisfied. 
Note: The variable r is not part of this gate equation but is typically used as a random challenge value sent by the 
Verifier to the Prover in the interactive stages of the protocol. It is crucial for ensuring the soundness of checks like 
the Permutation Argument. 
Plonks achieved simplifying the algebraic constraints, moving the focus to "Evaluations on a subgroup rather 
than coefficients of monomials," which streamlined both the permutation argument and the circuit arithmetization 
step. 
 
7 Computational analysis of various ZKP frameworks 
​
​
 ​
 ​
 ​
​
 
[zkBench] Includes 13 different elliptic curves[34][35] implemented across 9 libraries to perform arithmetic 
operations in finite fields benchmarks across 5 ZKP frameworks. The framework allows adding circuit 
implementation with arbitrary payloads in the backend to measure execution time and performance benchmarks 
based on 2 log parsers for visualization and information extraction- [zkalc] & [zk-Harness]. 
From the paper we learn, field-arithmetic performance is library–curve dependent rather than monotonic with field 
size. With BN254, gnark-crypto—leveraging Botrel et al.’s[BOT] Montgomery-multiplication optimizations and 
Longa’s[LON] inner-product—delivers about 30% lower latency for both addition and multiplication than other 
implementations. On BLS12-381, however, gnark-crypto is on average ~9% slower than competing libraries, so 
BN254’s smaller modulus does not guarantee universal speedups. Across all stacks, addition ≪ multiplication in 
cost, but the winner flips by curve, underscoring that practitioners must choose the curve+library pair 
deliberately.​
​
 
Historically, curves with smaller field characteristics like BN254 were initially believed to be inherently faster 
than larger-field curves like BLS12-381 for arithmetic operations 
 

7.1 Comparison of ZKP Frameworks and Arithmetic Libraries 
 
 
Framework / 
Library 
Arithmetic 
Backend 
Circuit Efficiency 
Proof Size 
Speed 
Optimizations 
Hardware 
Sensitivity 
Groth16 (with 
gnark-crypto) 
BN254, BLS12-381 
Very efficient with 
optimized libraries 
Smallest proofs 
Fast for scalar 
arithmetic, MSM 
up to 1.83× faster 
than blstrs 
Gains up to 50% 
on 
compute-optimize
d hardware 
PlonK 
BLS12-381 
Flexible circuits, 
some overhead 
Small–medium 
Optimized circuits 
reduce proving 
time 
Moderate 
sensitivity 
Halo2 
BLS12-381 
Dependent on 
circuit design (can 
be slower or 
faster) 
Medium 
Circuit-specific 
optimizations 
make it faster in 
some cases 
(1.09× faster in 
second test) 
Moderate 
STARKs (starky) 
Prime fields, 
FFT-friendly- 
Goldilock fields 
High scalability 
Very large 
(299×–679× bigger 
than 
Groth16/PlonK) 
Parallelism 
benefits proving 
time 
Strong 
dependence on 
memory 
bandwidth (40% 
gains possible) 
snarkjs (JS-based) 
ffjavascript 
Lower efficiency 
Small–medium 
14× slower than 
gnark in SHA256 
proving 
More limited 
optimization 
potential 
gnark-crypto 
BN254, BLS12-381 
Very efficient MSM 
operations 
Small 
9.4×–13× faster vs 
ffjavascript in 
G1/G2 
Significant benefit 
from 
compute-optimize
d hardware 
 
8 Performance Improvement in commitment schemes curated by Ethereum 
8.1 Merkle Sum Tree 
 
Built around the problem that public parameters should be easy to produce and verify. Binance adopted vitalik’s idea 
of Merkle Sum Tree[SMST]- proof of liability. Merkle tree is a characteristic datastructure where inner nodes 
represent balanced sum information from the child tree. This demonstrasted critical privacy leakages for users and 
created possibilities of taking away user anonymity, which is a core fundamental pillar of blockchain security. 
 

 
 
The diagram illustrates the structure of an Ethereum-inspired Merkle Sum Tree (MST). At the lowest level, each leaf 
node corresponds to an individual user’s record and contains: 
1.​
A pseudonymous user label,​
 
2.​
A random salt to prevent preimage attacks, and​
 
3.​
The exact balance held by that user. 
Each leaf is hashed, and pairs of leaves are combined into internal nodes. Every internal node stores two pieces of 
information: 
●​
a cryptographic hash of its left and right children, and​
 
●​
the sum of the balances in its subtree. 
As this process continues upward, the tree produces a single root hash along with a cumulative total liability value. 
This enables efficient verification: a user can check that their leaf is included in the root commitment by verifying 
only the nodes along their path, rather than the entire dataset. 
8.1.1 Privacy Risks: Mitigated by STARKS 
However, the approach introduces measurable privacy risks. Because each internal node reveals the aggregated 
balance of all users in its subtree, adversaries can infer partial information about user clusters, especially when the 
user distribution is sparse or unbalanced. This reduces anonymity and contradicts one of the foundational security 
assumptions of blockchain-based systems: minimizing unnecessary leakage of user state. 
SNARK ZKPs adopted vector based KZG-IOP commitment schemes which were much safer and mitigated the 
security concerns but extended problems of it’s own with large proof sizes. The largest trusted setup ever built 
perpetual powers of [tau] ceremony with the effective size of 228 ≈ 270 million highlights scalability challenges 
 

with the expected proof volume size requirements of layer 2 users. KZP-IOP has a slow prover overhead due to 
multi-scaler multiplication performed for 228 points with polynomial arithmetic operations(fast fourier transform) 
involved in encode, interpolate and polynomial evaluation assumed in large finite fields(like BN254 or BLS13-281). 
There are additional concerns- larger the trusted setup, larger the computation waste, larger the trust assumption 
making it a huge effort to achieve on a massive scale. 
 
Poseidon hashes over goldilock field bypass the need for a large trusted setup, with a more efficient small 
commitment size and faster verification time. This is because its parameters are deterministically defined and 
independent of any secret randomness. Unlike pairing-based SNARKs that rely on trapdoor-based structured 
reference strings, Poseidon’s field arithmetic and transparent design allow it to integrate into proof systems 
(STARKs, FRI-based IOPs[41]) that are trustless by construction. 
​
Empirical extrapolation suggests that executing a 228-sized Poseidon hash computation over the Goldilocks field 
requires approximately 322 seconds on an Apple M1 processor. Considering the architectural advancements of the 
Apple M4—namely, higher clock frequency, wider vector pipelines, and improved memory bandwidth—a 2.5× 
performance gain can be reasonably anticipated. The expected computation time can thus be approximated as: 
TM4=TM1 / Speedup = 322/2.5 ≈ 129 seconds. 
 
Accordingly, the runtime for the same workload on the Apple M4 is projected to fall within 120–150 seconds, 
reflecting a 2–3× improvement depending on memory-bound or compute-bound workload characteristics. This 
estimation provides a baseline for assessing scalability of Poseidon-based hashing within large-field cryptographic 
computations. 
 
8.2 Verkle trees for ethereum’s stateless future 
8.2.1 Merkle Particia Trie 
At the time of writing this paper consensus nodes consume the entire state of the blockchain to attest on proposed 
blocks, this state burden has extended the high harden requirements for ethereum community, making access to large 
and fast memory a difficult problem to solve. Merkle Patricia Trie stores key-value data, has about 9 levels of depth 
comprising of 3 types of nodes, root extension nodes- indexing common prefix keys from the account addresses, 
branch nodes representing a hexadecimal distribution from 0 to f and leaf nodes indexing final remaining nimble 
from the hash of a typical ethereum account address. Each node in a Merkle Patricia Trie is indexed by the hash of 
its contents. To prove a leaf belongs to the trie, the prover must recreate it’s path from the root. Ethereum maintains 
4 separate Mekle Patricia Tries each with a separate use for each node on the blockchain. 
 
●​
State root: Trie is indexed by the address of account, stores balance with nonce; For smart contracts, it also 
stores code hash and storage root tracking smart contract storage variables. 
●​
Transaction root: Containing transaction data. 
●​
Receipts root: Containing transaction receipt data. 
●​
Withdrawals root: Containing proof of state withdrawals. 
 
 

 
 
 
8.2.2 Verification Algorithm of Merkle Proofs 
Algorithm for verifying merkle proofs- The algorithm runs in O(log N) time where N is the number of leaves. 
 
Algorithm 1: VerifyMerkleProof(leaf, proof[], root) 
Input: 
 leaf — data element to verify 
 proof — list of sibling hashes along the path to the root 
 root — expected Merkle root hash 
 
1: h ← Hash(leaf) 
2: for each sibling s in proof do 
3: if s.position == "left" then 
4: h ← Hash(Concat(s, h)) 
5: else 
6: h ← Hash(Concat(h, s)) 
7: end if 
8: end for 
9: if h == root then 
10: return True // proof is valid 
11: else 
 

12: return False // proof is invalid 
13: end if 
 
Proof Size for a single account: Given Trie depth is 9 levels on average, branch nodes are 16 nimbles [0 -> 9, a -> f] 
and keccak256 hash function has a constant size of 32 bytes. 
Proof Size = Depth x nimble x proof size = 9 X 16 X 32 ≈ 4 KB 
 
For 1000 accounts this is approximately 4MB, this massive data problem is what ethereum is trying to solve using 
Verkle Trees. 
 
8.2.3 Verkle Trees: How does ethereum makes a more efficient data structure with vector commitments? 
In the earlier sections we explained how KZG commitments schemes are used as vector commitments. 
Given data vector [e1,e2, e3, ….ei], The prover sends a commitment C of vector (e1,e2, e3, ….ei) to a verifier without 
revealing it and to prove the vector contains data ei at index i, he also shares a generated proof(ei) of the choosen 
index with witness w(ei). This convinces the verifier of the prover’s claim without ever revealing the entire vector 
data. 
 
Verkle trees need a vector commitment scheme, some existing implementations[Verkle] utilize the KZG polynomial 
commitment schemes using rust-verkle implementing BLS 12381 elliptic curve defined over a large prime field ≈ 
2381 bits in length, nearly 48 bytes in size. The committed vector elements belong to a scalar field ≈ 2255 bits nearly 
32 bytes in size. The curve further supports 2 subgroups(G1,G2) needed to define pairings for KZG verification. 
 e(G1,G2) -> GT 
Ethereum [Verkle] Tree doesn’t use KZG commitment schemes due to restrictions over trusted setup and to avoid 
pairing based verifications. Ethereum uses Inner Product Argument commitment(IPA)[72][73] introduced by 
Bootle et al. [BCCGP16] also implemented in Bulletproofs [BBBPWM18], IPA uses a BanderSnatch curve defined 
over BLS 12381 in a scalar field making the base field much smaller and under 32 bytes as compared to KZG. 
Vector value commitment C belong to the scalar field ≈ 253 bits, also under 32 bytes. IPA commitment to the 
vector is a single elliptic curve point like KZG. IPA proofs however contain multiple elliptic curve points, so with 
constant commitment size the proof size grow logarithmically with the vector size, 2log2(n) each under 32 bytes. 
 
8.3 Table: Comparison of KZG and IPA Vector Commitment Schemes 
Commitment 
Scheme 
Curve & Field 
Vector Element 
Field Size 
Commitment 
Type 
Proof 
Structure 
Proof Size 
Trusted Setup 
KZG 
Commitment 
BLS12-381 
(Pairing-based) 
Scalar field ≈ 
2²⁵⁵ bits (~32 
bytes) 
Single elliptic 
curve 
point(2381bits) < 
48 Bytes 
Single elliptic 
curve point 
< 48 Bytes, 
Single EC point 
Required (SRS) 
IPA 
Commitment 
BanderSnatch 
(Non-pairing) 
Scalar field ≈ 
2²⁵³ bits (<32 
bytes) 
Single elliptic 
curve point(2255 
bits) < 32 Bytes 
Inner Product 
Argument 
(multiple 
elliptic curve 
points) 
each < 32 bytes, 
2log⁡2(n) EC 
points 
Not required 
(Transparent) 
 
 
9 Limitations and Future work 
While this survey consolidates existing understanding of Layer-2 security, several frontiers remain open for detailed 
exploration. The next version of this work will extend the discussion on Verkle trees, the emerging 
 

vector-commitment structure envisioned for Ethereum’s stateless architecture. Specifically, future work will 
decompose the internal organization of Verkle trees, analyze spatial complexity, and quantify verifier and prover 
performance under both KZG-based and Inner-Product Argument (IPA)-based implementations. 
We plan to formalize the comparative impact of these designs on state storage efficiency, proof generation latency, 
and gas economics within Ethereum’s roadmap. Furthermore, subsequent iterations of this survey will expand the 
quantitative analysis of cryptographic performance trade-offs in commitment schemes, providing empirical 
benchmarks and implementation insights. Through these extensions, the follow-up paper will aim to serve as a 
definitive reference for the security economics and cryptographic scalability primitives shaping next-generation 
Layer-2 and stateless blockchain systems.