Branch Landing: Bloom Filter-Based Source
Authorization for Forward-Edge CFI on RISC-V
You Wu1[0000−0002−1410−3196] and Peter Beerel1[0000−0002−8283−0168]
University of Southern California, Los Angeles CA 90057, USA {youwu,
pabeerel}@usc.edu
Abstract. Jump-Oriented Programming (JOP) attacks exploit indi-
rect control transfers to bypass backward-edge defenses, yet existing
forward-edge CFI mechanisms lack precise source-domain authorization:
type-based CFI admits all same-signature callers, while tag-based hard-
ware CFI is limited by fixed-width register storage that caps the num-
ber of simultaneously authorized sources. We propose Branch Landing
(BRL), a landing-based forward-edge CFI framework for RISC-V that re-
places fixed-capacity checks with Bloom filter membership queries. Two
lightweight ISA extensions, bld and brl, propagate a source Section
Identifier (SID) through a dedicated BRState register and validate it at
each landing site with fixed-probe latency that is independent of the
number of authorized sources under a chosen filter configuration. Sec-
tion granularity is configurable, supporting policies from type-based to
CFG-derived authorization within a single mechanism. We implement
Branch Landing in the LLVM RISC-V backend and evaluate it on 81
BEEBS benchmarks under two representative policy configurations: a
function-level, type-based policy and a basic-block-level, CFG-derived
policy. Under a 3-cycle brl latency model, the two configurations incur
average runtime overheads of only 0.210% and 0.421%, with mean code
size growth of 0.46% and 0.52% respectively. The CFG-derived policy
reduces the average equivalence class size by 32.5% compared to the
type-based policy, and all evaluated executions complete without BRL
enforcement failures.
Keywords: Control-Flow Integrity · Jump-Oriented Programming · Bloom
Filter · RISC-V
1
Introduction
Memory corruption vulnerabilities continue to pose a fundamental threat to
system security. Even in the presence of Data Execution Prevention (DEP) [20]
and Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR) [24,29], attackers can hijack
control flow through code-reuse attacks [3,26,28]. While shadow stacks [6] and
backward-edge protections have significantly reduced practical Return-Oriented
Programming (ROP) exploitability, attackers increasingly pivot to Jump-Oriented
Programming (JOP) [3, 9], which chains gadgets exclusively through forward-
edge indirect transfers such as jalr and jr in RISC-V [32]. Since JOP bypasses
arXiv:2604.23331v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

2
Y. Wu et al.
backward-edge defenses entirely, dedicated forward-edge CFI mechanisms are
essential [1,5].
Existing JOP defenses fundamentally leave a source-authorization gap, as
they fail to precisely bind indirect branches to their legitimate origins. Coarse
landing-based mechanisms, such as Intel CET [15,30] and ARM BTI [2], verify
that an indirect branch reaches a valid destination but impose no constraint on
which source may initiate the transfer. Type-based CFI mechanisms, such as
FineIBT [12] and Clang CFI [18, 31], narrow the target set through function-
signature matching, but all callers sharing the same type pass the check in-
discriminately. Tag-based hardware mechanisms, such as Bratter [23], support
richer context-sensitive policies via per-source tag values, but their fixed-width
register storage imposes a hard ceiling on the number of sources that can be
simultaneously authorized for a single target. Consequently, when legitimate
callers exceed the available tag slots, the remaining callers are left without an
enforceable policy.
In this paper, we propose Branch Landing (BRL), a landing-based forward-
edge CFI framework for RISC-V that shifts the hardware enforcement paradigm
from rigid one-to-one equality checks to flexible, set-based membership queries.
By employing Bloom filters [4] to represent authorized caller sets, BRL effec-
tively decouples authorization capacity from fixed-width register constraints.
To realize this paradigm shift at the architectural level, we design two novel,
lightweight ISA extensions: bld (Branch Landing Descriptor) and brl (Branch
Landing Verification). Prior to an indirect branch, our bld instruction securely
propagates a source Section Identifier (SID) into a dedicated architectural reg-
ister, BRState. Subsequently, the brl instruction operates at the valid landing
site to evaluate the condition SIDsrc ∈AllowedSources(T) with a fixed num-
ber of hash probes independent of AllowedSources(T), immediately triggering a
control-flow protection fault if the source SID falls outside the authorized set.
Two key properties distinguish Branch Landing from prior mechanisms. First,
it provides scalable source-domain authorization: unlike type-based CFI, which
reduces all callers to a single equivalence class, and unlike tag-based CFI, which
is structurally limited by register slot count, BRL leverages its underlying Bloom
filter to encode large authorized-source sets per target with fixed-probe verifi-
cation and no general-purpose register pressure. Second, our instruction design
is inherently policy-agnostic: the newly introduced bld/brl hardware infras-
tructure remains static, yet it can instantiate type-based, CFG-derived [21,35],
or other authorization models by varying only how AllowedSources(T) is con-
structed at compile time. Table 1 summarizes these design axes across represen-
tative CFI mechanisms.
We implement Branch Landing in the LLVM RISC-V backend and evaluate
it on the 81 BEEBS benchmarks [22] under two policy configurations: BRL-Func
(function-level SID with type-based authorization) and BRL-CFG (basic-block-
level SID with CFG-derived authorization). Runtime overhead is measured on
the Spike RISC-V ISA simulator using a weighted-cycle model under three brl
latency points: 3, 5, and 10 cycles, with bld modeled as a 1-cycle state up-

Branch Landing
3
Table 1. Comparison of forward-edge CFI mechanisms.
Mechanism
Source-aware Auth. model Scalable Policy-agnostic
CET/BTI [2,15]
✗
Target-only
✓
✗
FineIBT [12]
Partial
Type equality
✓
✗
Bratter [23]
✓
Tag equality
✗
Partial
Branch Landing (BRL)
✓
Membership
✓
✓
date, following the methodology of Bratter [23]. The brl3, brl5, and brl10
represent optimistic, realistic, and conservative hardware implementations, re-
spectively. A detailed cycle-by-cycle justification is given in Section 5.2. Under
the brl3 model, BRL-Func and BRL-CFG incur mean runtime overheads of
0.210% and 0.421% respectively, more than 14× lower than Bratter’s reported
5.99% for combined function-signature and branch regulation enforcement un-
der the same weighted-cycle style of evaluation. Even under the conservative
brl10 model, the mean overhead remains below 1.3%. This comparison should
be interpreted as indicative rather than identical, since the protected edge sets
and hardware assumptions differ across the two systems. Code size overhead re-
mains modest at 0.46% (BRL-Func) and 0.52% (BRL-CFG) mean, less than half
of Bratter_Both’s 1.20%, while BRL-CFG simultaneously reduces the average
equivalence class size by 32.5% relative to BRL-Func. All 81 benchmarks execute
with zero false positives across both configurations.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
– We formalize the source-authorization gap in existing type-based and tag-
based forward-edge CFI mechanisms and propose Branch Landing, a RISC-V
CFI framework that enforces source-domain authorization via Bloom filter
membership queries through two lightweight ISA extensions.
– We introduce a configurable section-granularity model that instantiates mul-
tiple CFI policies, ranging from type-based to CFG-derived, within a single
policy-agnostic enforcement mechanism.
– We implement Branch Landing as an LLVM RISC-V backend extension and
a Spike ISA simulator prototype, demonstrating on the BEEBS benchmark
suite that it achieves substantially lower runtime and code size overhead
than prior tag-based hardware CFI while providing finer-grained source au-
thorization and tighter equivalence classes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews code-
reuse attacks and related CFI mechanisms. Section 3 presents the design of
Branch Landing. Section 4 evaluates Branch Landing on the BEEBS bench-
mark suite. Section 5 discusses design considerations and potential extensions.
Section 6 concludes.

4
Y. Wu et al.
2
Background and Related Work
This section reviews prior work on control-flow integrity relevant to Branch
Landing, organized along the design axes that motivate our approach: attack
model, enforcement granularity, and authorization model.
2.1
Jump-Oriented Programming on RISC-V
Memory corruption vulnerabilities, such as buffer overflows, use-after-free er-
rors, and type confusion, allow attackers to overwrite control-sensitive data in-
cluding return addresses, function pointers, and jump table indices. Return-
Oriented Programming (ROP) [26] chains short instruction sequences ending in
ret to construct arbitrary computations; shadow stacks [6] have substantially
mitigated this vector. Jump-Oriented Programming (JOP) [3] avoids return in-
structions entirely, instead sequencing gadgets through indirect control transfers.
Because JOP uses only forward-edge transfers, it bypasses shadow stacks and
other backward-edge defenses, motivating dedicated forward-edge CFI mecha-
nisms.
On RISC-V, the jalr instruction is the primary JOP primitive. A typical
attack proceeds as follows. Consider a program that stores a function pointer in
memory and later invokes it through an indirect call:
struct handler {
char buf[64];
void (*fn)(int);
// function pointer
};
void dispatch(struct handler *h, int arg) {
h->fn(arg);
// compiles to jalr ra, rs1, 0
}
Listing 1.1. Vulnerable indirect call site.
A buffer overflow into h->buf lets the attacker overwrite h->fn with the
address of a chosen gadget. When dispatch executes the indirect call, control
transfers to that gadget instead of the intended callee. A useful JOP gadget on
RISC-V takes the form:
# Load next target from an attacker-controlled
# dispatcher table and jump to it.
ld
t0, 0(a0)
# load next gadget address
addi
a0, a0, 8
# advance dispatcher pointer
jalr
zero, t0, 0
# indirect jump to next gadget
Listing 1.2. A representative RISC-V JOP gadget.
By chaining such gadgets through a dispatcher table, the attacker constructs
Turing-complete computation. Crucially, every transfer in the chain is a syntac-
tically legitimate jalr to a valid instruction address, so coarse landing-based

Branch Landing
5
foo1()
foo2()
foo3()
foo4()
target()
Check TypeID
== caller type
 pass
foo5()
attacker
pass 
 All same-type callers pass
 Attacker undetected
(a) Type-based CFI
BTR register
tag0
tag1
tag2
tag3
target()
Check tag0 foo1
Check tag1 foo2
Check tag2 foo3
Check tag3 foo4
foo5()
attacker
no slot 
 Only 4 slots available
 Incomplete protection policy
(b) Tag-based hardware CFI
foo1()
bld
SID1
foo2()
bld
SID2
foo3()
bld
SID3
foo4()
bld
SID4
BRState
SID | valid
target()
brl SID_T
Bloom Filter BF[T]
h1(SIDsrc), h2(SIDsrc) 
 bit positions
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
SIDsrc BF[T] authorized
foo5()
attacker
SID BF fault
 Check SID via Bloom filter membership
 Scalable: arbitrary # of authorized sources
(c) Branch Landing
Fig. 1. Existing and proposed forward-edge CFI defenses. (a) Type-based CFI
(FineIBT): all callers sharing the same function type pass the check, including attacker-
controlled foo5. (b) Tag-based hardware CFI (Bratter): the 4-slot BTR is exhausted
by foo1–foo4; no slot is available to express a policy for foo5. (c) Branch Landing:
source SIDs are checked via Bloom filter membership, supporting an arbitrary number
of authorized callers with fixed-probe verification independent of set size.
defenses that only check whether the destination is a marked landing site fail
to detect the attack: the gadget entry points are themselves valid landing sites
in the original program. This observation motivates source-aware CFI, in which
each indirect transfer must be authorized not only by its destination but also by
its origin.
2.2
Coarse Landing-Based CFI
Intel CET IBT [15, 30], ARM BTI [2], and recent RISC-V proposals [10, 19,
25] require indirect branches to land on designated marker instructions (endbr,
bti, or equivalent). These mechanisms are target-centric: they verify that the
destination is a valid landing site but impose no constraint on which source may
initiate the transfer, admitting JOP chains among the full set of marked sites.
2.3
Type-Based CFI
FineIBT [12] and Clang CFI [18,31] restrict indirect calls to targets with compat-
ible function signatures. Authorization remains a single equality check: all call
sites sharing the same type reach all matching targets, regardless of structural
caller–callee relationships.
ECCut [33] refines LLVM-CFI equivalence classes through complete field
sensitivity, achieving 94.8% average EC reduction on SPEC CPU; HPCFI [16]
integrates multiple static analyses for similar gains. Both narrow the type-based
target set but remain equality-based and do not provide explicit source-domain
authorization. Their analysis refinements are complementary to BRL and could
serve as policy inputs to construct tighter AllowedSources(T) sets.

6
Y. Wu et al.
2.4
Tag-Based Hardware CFI
Tag-based mechanisms associate each source with a runtime tag value and verify
it at the landing site, supporting finer-grained policies than type equality alone.
Bratter [23] introduces a Branch Tag Register (BTR), a 32-bit CSR parti-
tioned into four independent 8-bit slots (tag0–tag3). Two dedicated instructions,
sbtag and cbtag, write and verify individual slots before and after indirect trans-
fers, respectively. This allows Bratter to enforce context-sensitive policies that
would require trampolines or function duplication under single-tag mechanisms.
Bratter reports average execution time overheads of 0.43% for function-signature
enforcement and 5.99% when combined with branch regulation on the BEEBS
benchmark suite.
However, Bratter’s enforcement model remains equality-based: each slot stores
a fixed tag value and the callee checks for an exact match. When multiple legiti-
mate callers with different contexts must reach the same target, they must either
share a tag or occupy separate slots. The four-slot BTR imposes a hard ceiling:
as shown in Figure 1(b), a program with five or more distinct source domains
targeting the same function exhausts the register, leaving the remaining callers
without an enforceable policy. This is a structural limitation of fixed-width tag
storage, not an artifact of any particular implementation.
3
Design
Branch Landing enforces forward-edge CFI through two lightweight ISA exten-
sions, bld and brl, combined with per-target Bloom filter metadata. This sec-
tion describes the threat model, the core enforcement mechanism, the supported
policy instantiations, and the granularity trade-offs.
3.1
Threat Model
Branch Landing targets forward-edge control-flow hijacking attacks, including
Jump-Oriented Programming (JOP), function pointer corruption, virtual call
hijacking, and dispatcher-based gadget chaining. The attacker is assumed to pos-
sess arbitrary memory write capabilities—sufficient to corrupt function pointers,
virtual table entries, or jump table indices, but is unable to modify executable
code or Branch Landing metadata, which are protected as read-only by the op-
erating system. We further assume that the attacker cannot tamper with the
BRState register, which is not memory-mapped and is updated architecturally
only by committed bld/brl instructions rather than by ordinary stores or generic
user-level CSR writes (Section 3.3). Under this model, the defense guarantees
that any indirect control transfer must originate from a source domain autho-
rized to reach the target landing site; unauthorized transfers trigger a processor
exception.
We explicitly place microarchitectural side-channel attackers outside our threat
model. Branch Landing is an architectural CFI mechanism and inherits the same

Branch Landing
7
scoping convention as prior hardware-assisted CFI work, including FineIBT [12],
Bratter [23], and Intel CET [15], all of which target architectural control flow
rather than microarchitectural leakage. Speculative execution, cache timing, and
other microarchitectural channels require orthogonal defenses (e.g., speculative
load hardening, cache partitioning) that can be deployed alongside BRL. We an-
alyze the residual side-channel attack surface that BRL specifically introduces,
and discuss potential hardening directions, in Section 3.7.
3.2
ISA Extensions
Branch Landing introduces two new instructions to the RISC-V ISA. Both are
encoded as I-type instructions within a reserved custom opcode space, ensur-
ing backward compatibility with existing RISC-V implementations: on legacy
hardware that does not recognize bld/brl, the instructions can be treated as
illegal-instruction faults, providing a fail-closed default.
bld (Branch Landing Descriptor). The bld instruction is inserted by the com-
piler immediately before each indirect control transfer (jalr or jr). It takes
an assembler-supplied source Section Identifier (SID) operand and performs two
operations atomically: (1) it writes the SID into BRState.sid, and (2) it sets
the validity bit BRState.valid ←1. The instruction executes in a single cycle,
as it only writes an immediate value into a dedicated CSR without requiring
memory access or ALU computation.
bld
SID_src
jalr
x0, rs1, 0
brl (Branch Landing Verification). The brl instruction is inserted at
the entry of each valid indirect branch target. It takes a target Section Identifier
(SIDT ) operand that uniquely identifies the landing site within the program.
When execution reaches a landing site, brl performs the following sequence:
1. Validity check. If BRState.valid = 0, the site was reached without a
preceding bld, indicating an attacker-controlled jump that bypassed the in-
strumented call sequence. The processor raises a control-flow protection fault
immediately.
2. Filter resolution. brl uses its target SID operand to index a global filter
descriptor table stored in .rodata, retrieving the base address and bit-width
of the per-target Bloom filter BF[SIDT ]. The descriptor table layout is fixed
at link time and protected as read-only.
3. Bloom filter lookup. brl retrieves SIDsrc from BRState.sid and evalu-
ates the membership query SIDsrc ∈BF[SIDT ] by hashing SIDsrc through
k hash functions and checking the corresponding bits in BF[SIDT ].
4. Authorization decision. If all k bits are set, the transfer is authorized:
execution proceeds normally and BRState.valid is cleared to 0, ensuring
that authorization state cannot be reused across multiple transfers. If any
bit is clear, SIDsrc is not a member of the authorized set and a control-flow
protection fault is raised.

8
Y. Wu et al.
Under the latency models used in our evaluation, brl performs membership
checking with a fixed number of hash probes, in time independent of the number
of authorized source domains for the target. This timing assumes a hardware-
optimized implementation in which the filter descriptor and filter words hit L1 D-
cache and the two hash functions execute in parallel; we revisit these assumptions
and their hardware implications in Section 5.2.
3.3
BRState Register
Branch Landing introduces a dedicated architectural register, BRState, imple-
mented as a Control and Status Register (CSR) whose fields are not directly
writable by application memory operations or generic user-level CSR writes.
Application code updates this state only through the new bld/brl instructions,
while privileged software may save, restore, or clear it as part of architectural
context management. BRState maintains two fields:
– BRState.valid (1 bit): indicates whether a pending source authorization is
active. Set to 1 by bld; cleared to 0 by brl upon completion of the landing-
site check.
– BRState.sid (31 bits): holds the source Section Identifier propagated by the
most recent bld. A 31-bit field supports up to 231 distinct SIDs, sufficient
for basic-block-level granularity even in large programs.
BRState is a single-use register: the validity bit is cleared by every brl ex-
ecution, ensuring that authorization state from one transfer cannot be carried
over to a subsequent transfer. This single-use invariant is critical to security:
without it, an attacker who reaches a brl site via a legitimate transfer could
retain the authorized BRState and redirect a second transfer to an unauthorized
target.
Interaction with Exceptions and Context Switches. When a trap or context
switch occurs between a bld and its corresponding brl, the operating system
must save and restore BRState as part of the thread context, similar to the
treatment of other privileged CSRs. If BRState is not preserved, the subsequent
brl will observe BRState.valid = 0 and raise a fault. This fail-closed behavior
prevents authorization state from leaking across execution contexts. An alter-
native design choice is to unconditionally clear BRState on every trap entry;
this sacrifices the rare case where an interrupt occurs within the bld–jalr–brl
window unless the trap handler restarts execution before the consumed bld but
simplifies the OS context-switch path.
3.4
Section ID Assignment and Granularity
Branch Landing organizes program code into protection domains called sections,
each assigned a unique Section Identifier (SID) at compile time. The granularity
of section assignment is configurable along a spectrum:

Branch Landing
9
– Module granularity: all functions within a compilation unit share a single
SID. This minimizes metadata size but admits any caller within the same
module, providing the weakest isolation.
– Function granularity: each function receives a distinct SID. This is the
natural match for type-based authorization policies and is used in the BRL-
Func configuration.
– Basic-block granularity: each basic block is assigned an independent SID,
so that different call sites within the same function carry distinct source
identities. This is the granularity used in BRL-CFG and prevents intra-
function authorization reuse.
– User-defined groupings: the compiler accepts annotations that group ba-
sic blocks into custom protection domains, enabling application-specific poli-
cies such as isolating privilege-boundary code from general-purpose code
within the same function.
The choice of granularity affects three dimensions simultaneously. Finer gran-
ularity strengthens isolation. An attacker who compromises one call site within
a function cannot reuse its SID to reach targets authorized only for a different
call site, but increases the number of distinct SID values in the program, which
in turn affects Bloom filter sizing. Coarser granularity reduces the SID names-
pace and shrinks per-target Bloom filters, but admits more source domains per
authorization set. Cross-compilation-unit SID assignment is straightforward at
function granularity (SIDs can be assigned per compilation unit and reconciled at
link time) but requires either link-time optimization (LTO) or a link-time meta-
data merge pass at basic-block granularity, where the SID namespace grows
substantially. Our current prototype assumes whole-program compilation; ex-
tending the toolchain to support incremental compilation with basic-block SIDs
is a practical engineering challenge that does not affect the hardware mechanism.
3.5
Bloom Filter Authorization Metadata
For each landing site T, the compiler constructs the authorization set AllowedSources(T)
from the selected CFI policy and encodes it into a Bloom filter stored in a read-
only metadata section (.rodata). A Bloom filter is a space-efficient probabilistic
data structure that supports membership queries with a fixed number of hash
probes, a tunable false positive rate and zero false negatives [4].
Filter Parameters. Each per-target filter is characterized by three parameters:
m (the number of bits), k (the number of independent hash functions), and n
(the number of authorized SIDs to encode). The theoretical false positive rate is
approximately:
pfp ≈
 1 −e−kn/mk
(1)
A lower pfp tightens the security guarantee, reducing the probability that an
unauthorized SID is spuriously admitted at the cost of a larger m. In our evalu-
ation, we use a fixed filter size that provides pfp < 10−3 across all benchmarks.

10
Y. Wu et al.
For programs with very large AllowedSources sets (e.g., event-driven frameworks
with hundreds of registered callbacks), per-target adaptive sizing can maintain
a uniform false positive bound without inflating metadata for simple targets.
Hash Function Design. The k hash functions must be fast, independent, and
deterministic. We employ a double-hashing scheme [17]: given two base hash
functions h1 and h2, the i-th hash is computed as hi(SID) = (h1(SID) + i ·
h2(SID)) mod m for i = 0, . . . , k−1. This reduces the number of independent
hash computations to two while preserving the theoretical false positive bound,
and maps naturally to a two-cycle hardware implementation within the brl
instruction’s execution.
Metadata Layout. Per-target Bloom filter bit arrays are stored contiguously in
a dedicated read-only section, indexed by target SID. A global filter descriptor
table maps each SIDT to a tuple (base, m), where base points to the start of
BF[SIDT ] within the bit-array region and m is the filter bit-width. At runtime,
the immediate operand carried by each brl instruction directly indexes this de-
scriptor table, yielding the metadata required to perform the membership check
described in Section 3.2. Both the descriptor table and the filter bit arrays re-
side in read-only memory protected by the operating system’s page permissions;
an attacker with arbitrary write capabilities cannot modify the authorization
sets without triggering a page fault, consistent with the threat model defined in
Section 3.1.
Interaction with SID Granularity. The Bloom filter size and SID granularity
interact in a counterintuitive way: finer SID granularity tends to shrink each
target’s authorized set (because the CFG analysis distributes callers over more
distinct SIDs), which in turn reduces the required filter size per target. Con-
versely, coarser granularity collapses callers into fewer SIDs, yielding trivially
smaller authorized sets but with weaker security. The net metadata cost there-
fore depends on the program structure: callback-heavy programs benefit most
from fine SIDs and small filters, while programs dominated by a few highly
polymorphic call sites may see diminishing returns from finer granularity.
3.6
Policy Instantiations
Branch Landing decouples policy generation from runtime enforcement. The
same bld/brl mechanism can enforce different CFI policies by varying how
AllowedSources(T) is constructed at compile time. We evaluate two representa-
tive configurations.
BRL-Func (Function-Level Granularity). Each function is assigned a unique
SID and authorization sets are derived from function type signatures: a target T
admits any source whose call site declares a compatible type. This configuration
is comparable in policy strength to FineIBT [12] and serves as a performance

Branch Landing
11
baseline. Unlike FineIBT, which performs a single type-equality check, BRL-
Func uses a Bloom filter membership query, naturally handling the case where
multiple call sites of the same type are authorized without requiring a shared
tag.
BRL-CFG (Basic-Block-Level Granularity). Authorization sets are derived from
an interprocedural control-flow graph. SIDs are assigned at basic-block granularity—
one SID per basic block—so that each call site within a function carries a distinct
source identity. The compiler projects CFG edges onto protection domain pairs,
producing a refined AllowedSources(T) that admits only those domains from
which a direct CFG path to T exists. This combination of finer-grained SID
assignment and CFG-derived policy prevents an attacker from reusing autho-
rization obtained at one call site to reach a different target through another
call site within the same function, approaching the precision of whole-program
CFG-based defenses while retaining the compatibility benefits of landing-based
enforcement.
The two configurations represent different points in the security–overhead
trade-off space, which we quantify in Section 4.
3.7
Security Analysis
We analyze the security guarantees of Branch Landing under the threat model
defined in Section 3.1.
Security Invariants Branch Landing’s enforcement guarantees rest on three
invariants jointly maintained by the hardware mechanism, the compiler instru-
mentation, and the operating system’s memory protection.
Invariant 1 (Authorized Origin). Every successful execution of brl at landing
site T implies that a preceding bld instruction was committed on the same
control-flow path, and that the source SID it propagated satisfies SIDsrc ∈
BF[SIDT ].
Invariant 2 (Single-Use Authorization). The BRState.valid bit is monotoni-
cally consumed: any brl that observes valid = 1 clears it before commit, and
any brl that observes valid = 0 raises a control-flow protection fault.
Invariant 3 (Metadata and Code Integrity). The filter descriptor table, all per-
target Bloom filter bit arrays, and the program text containing bld immedi-
ates reside in read-only memory protected by OS page permissions. BRState is
writable only through committed bld instructions.

12
Y. Wu et al.
Defense Against Forward-Edge Attacks Invariant 1 blocks JOP gadget
chaining and SID forgery via memory corruption: a corrupted indirect branch
either lacks a preceding bld altogether or carries a compile-time-fixed SID that
is not a member of the target’s authorized set, causing the subsequent brl to
fault. Because BRState is a privileged CSR whose sid field can only be updated
by executing an existing bld instruction in read-only program text (Invariant 3),
the attacker cannot inject arbitrary SID values. Invariant 2 covers two additional
cases: an attacker who jumps directly to a brl site without a preceding bld
observes valid = 0 and faults immediately (bld bypass), and authorization state
consumed by one brl cannot be replayed at a second landing site (BRState
replay). Finally, Invariant 3 prevents filter or descriptor tampering: both reside
in .rodata and any write triggers a page fault.
Bloom Filter False Positives An attacker cannot inject arbitrary SIDs into
BRState; the only architectural path is to execute an existing bld whose immedi-
ate is fixed at compile time (Invariant 3). Let S denote the set of distinct SIDs in
the binary. The expected number of spuriously authorized SIDs at any target T
is bounded by |S| · pfp; with |S| ∼103 and pfp < 10−3 in our benchmarks, fewer
than one false authorization is expected per target. Exploiting even a spurious
SID further requires a feasible path to the carrier bld and a hijackable indirect
branch to T, making the practical attack surface substantially smaller than the
raw pfp. We measured zero false positives across all 81 benchmarks under both
configurations (Section 4).
Limitations BRL protects forward edges only; backward-edge attacks require a
complementary shadow stack. An adversary who legitimately reaches a landing
site and exploits code beyond it is not detected, a limitation shared by all landing-
based CFI [7]. Without LTO, independently compiled units may emit colliding
SIDs; a link-time merge pass is required. BRL introduces filter-access and timing
side channels analogous to those in prior hardware CFI [12, 15, 23]; mitigating
them requires orthogonal microarchitectural defenses and is left to future work.
Data-only attacks [14] are outside the scope of any CFI mechanism.
4
Evaluation
We implemented Branch Landing in the LLVM RISC-V backend, adding com-
piler instrumentation for bld insertion at indirect branch sources and brl inser-
tion at valid landing sites, together with Bloom filter metadata generation for
per-target authorization. Runtime evaluation is performed on the Spike RISC-V
ISA simulator extended with bld/brl support.
4.1
Evaluation Configurations
We evaluate three configurations:

Branch Landing
13
– Baseline: an uninstrumented build without control-flow protection.
– BRL-Func: each function receives a unique SID; authorization sets are de-
rived from function type signatures, mirroring the policy strength of type-
based CFI mechanisms such as FineIBT [12].
– BRL-CFG: SIDs are assigned at basic-block granularity (one SID per ba-
sic block); authorization sets are derived from interprocedural control-flow
graph analysis, admitting only structurally reachable callers.
BRL-Func isolates the cost of Bloom filter enforcement under a coarse, type-
equivalent policy; BRL-CFG represents the strictest instantiation, combining
finer-grained SID assignment with a more precise authorization policy.
We use the BEEBS (Bristol/Embecosm Embedded Benchmark Suite) [22],
a collection of 81 small C programs designed for bare-metal execution and com-
monly used to evaluate compiler optimizations and ISA extensions. All bench-
marks are compiled with the same LLVM toolchain at optimization level -O2
under each configuration. We report the arithmetic mean across all benchmarks,
consistent with the methodology used by Bratter to enable direct comparison.
We report three classes of metrics: (1) code size: static .text section growth
and CFI instruction density (ratio of dynamically executed brl/bld instructions
to total instructions); (2) performance: weighted execution time overhead under
three latency assumptions—brl3 (3-cycle brl), brl5 (5-cycle brl) and brl10
(10-cycle brl), all paired with a 1-cycle bld. (3) security: equivalence class (EC)
size and the number of protected targets under each policy;
4.2
Code Size Overhead
We measure code size overhead introduced by Branch Landing by comparing the
.text section size of instrumented binaries against an uninstrumented baseline.
This ensures that any difference in .text size is attributable solely to the inserted
BRL/BLD instructions and Bloom filter lookup sequences.
Table 2 reports the results for selected benchmarks and aggregate statistics
across all 81 BEEBS benchmarks. The overhead is consistently small: on average
0.46% for BRL-Func and 0.52% for BRL-CFG.
Under BRL-CFG, most benchmarks exhibit overhead comparable to or lower
than BRL-Func, because the pointer analysis prunes spurious targets and pro-
duces smaller Bloom filters. However, a few benchmarks show elevated CFG over-
head. The most notable is cover (7.85%), where the pointer analysis resolves
181 indirect call targets—far more than the 2 identified by type matching—
leading to additional Bloom filter entries. Similarly, trio-snprintf (2.30%) and
trio-sscanf (1.88%) contain rich format-string dispatch logic that the CFG
analysis resolves more completely. These cases represent a deliberate security–
size tradeoff: the CFG policy protects a strictly larger set of indirect transfers
at the cost of modestly larger instrumentation metadata.
The low code size overhead stems from the Bloom filter encoding: each tar-
get’s allowed-source set is stored as a compact bit array, so a single BRL in-
struction suffices at each protected entry point regardless of how many sources

14
Y. Wu et al.
may reach it. The check itself—load the filter word, hash the caller SID, and
test the corresponding bit—adds only a few instructions per target. Compared
to Bratter [23], BRL-Func incurs moderately higher overhead than Bratter_FS
(0.46% vs. 0.15%) due to the Bloom filter metadata storage. However, when
CFG-level protection is enabled, this design advantage becomes clear: Bratter
may insert up to four cbtag instructions at a single target to encode multiple tag
values, and this per-target cost accumulates in benchmarks with dense control
flow—Bratter_Both reaches 1.20% on average and 11.33% on cover. BRL-CFG
remains at 0.52% mean, less than half of Bratter_Both, while providing finer-
grained source-level authorization.
Bloom filter metadata in .rodata contributes an additional mean of 86 bytes
(BRL-Func) and a median of 264 bytes (BRL-CFG) per benchmark. As a fraction
of total binary size (.text + .rodata), this amounts to a mean of 0.68% and
4.15% respectively, though the CFG figure is dominated by cover (6,440 bytes
for 181 protected targets); the median CFG .rodata growth is 264 bytes. We
note that Bratter [23] stores authorization state in a dedicated CSR and incurs
no binary metadata cost, making this a structural rather than implementation
difference.
Table 2. Code size overhead and CFI density for selected BEEBS benchmarks. .text
OH = static text section growth; CFI density = (BRL+BLD executed) / total instruc-
tions.
.text OH (%)
CFI Density (%)
Benchmark
Func
CFG
Func
CFG
cover
0.43
7.85
0.024
8.051
trio-snprintf
1.23
2.30
0.683
1.307
trio-sscanf
0.67
1.88
0.865
1.213
picojpeg
0.23
1.33
0.001
0.114
lcdnum
0.55
1.26
0.232
2.489
mergesort
1.20
0.92
3.008
2.976
duff
0.54
0.83
0.046
1.812
miniz
0.31
0.76
0.588
0.409
template
0.58
0.42
0.931
0.930
bs
0.56
0.41
0.391
0.394
wikisort
0.23
0.25
3.239
3.226
Median (all 81)
0.50
0.37
0.008
0.008
Mean (all 81)
0.46
0.52
0.147
0.307
4.3
Performance Overhead
The execution time overhead is estimated using Spike’s instruction histogram
multiplied by per-class cycle weights, following the weighted-cycle methodology

Branch Landing
15
cover
duff
lcdnum
trio-sscanf
trio-snprintf
mergesort
wikisort
template
bs
miniz
picojpeg
nettle-sha
sglib-rb
bubble
dijkstra
AVG
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Weighted overhead (%)
Func-brl3
Func-brl5
Func-brl10
CFG-brl3
CFG-brl5
CFG-brl10
Fig. 2. Weighted performance overhead under BRL-Func and BRL-CFG policies with
3-cycle, 5-cycle, and 10-cycle brl latency assumptions and a 1-cycle bld.
of Bratter [23], which assigns 2 cycles to each sbtag/cbtag instruction. We
assign 1 cycle to ALU and bld (immediate-to-CSR write), 2 to taken branches,
3 to load/store, and 10 to ecall. For brl, we evaluate three latency points—
brl3, brl5, and brl10. We detail introduce these differences in Section 5.2.
All 81 benchmarks achieve zero Fail across both policies under each latency
model, confirming that the instrumented legitimate executions do not trigger
enforcement failures.
Figure 2 shows the weighted overhead for selected benchmarks. The mean
under brl3 is 0.210% (BRL-Func) and 0.421% (BRL-CFG), rising to 0.331% and
0.651% under brl5, and to 0.633% and 1.228% under the conservative brl10
model—in all three cases well below Bratter_Both’s reported 5.99% average.
Because Bratter and BRL enforce different policy abstractions, this comparison
is best viewed as a same-benchmark reference point rather than a strict apples-
to-apples hardware comparison. This gap arises because Bratter’s cbtag executes
at every basic block entry traversed at runtime, whereas our BLD/BRL pair fires
only on actual indirect transfers, which occur far less frequently.
The one notable exception is cover under BRL-CFG, which reaches 10.74%
under brl3, 16.12% under brl5, and 29.57% under brl10, due to three switch
statements (120, 50, and 10 cases) now protected against JOP attacks. The
brl3 figure closely matches Bratter’s reported 11.1% BR overhead for the same
benchmark [23], validating that our indirect jump instrumentation achieves com-
parable coverage. Outside cover, no benchmark exceeds 3.8% under brl3, 5.7%
under brl5, or 10.4% under brl10 for either policy. For benchmarks without
indirect jumps (e.g., dijkstra, bubblesort, huffbench), BRL-Func and BRL-
CFG produce identical overhead, as the CFG-mode jump protection adds no
instructions when no indirect jumps are present. Table 3 provides the aggregate
statistics. Because Spike is a functional simulator, the dynamic instruction his-
togram is independent of cycle-weight assumptions, so overhead under any brl

16
Y. Wu et al.
latency can be obtained by linear recomputation from the same trace without
re-executing the benchmarks.
Table 3. Performance overhead summary across all 81 BEEBS benchmarks under
three brl latency models.
brl3 (%)
brl5 (%)
brl10 (%)
Statistic Func
CFG Func
CFG
Func
CFG
Mean
0.210
0.421 0.331
0.651
0.633
1.228
Median 0.013
0.014 0.021
0.023
0.042
0.046
Max
3.752 10.743 5.633 16.122 10.333 29.569
4.4
Equivalence Class Size
The equivalence class (EC) of an indirect call site is the set of target functions
that the CFI policy permits it to invoke. A smaller EC means the attacker has
fewer gadgets available after hijacking a function pointer, so EC size is a widely
used security metric for CFI schemes [33]. For Branch Landing, a smaller EC
size also means more concrete source-target mapping.
Table 4 reports the compile-time EC statistics across all 81 BEEBS bench-
marks. Under BRL-Func, the average EC size is 1.96 targets per call site; under
BRL-CFG, this drops to 1.32, a 32.5% reduction. The improvement is con-
sistent: BRL-CFG tightens the EC in every benchmark for which BRL-Func
reports an EC larger than 1.
The reduction stems from two complementary effects. First, the pointer-
analysis-based policy discovers more indirect call sites than type matching alone
(mean 7.47 vs. 5.37), which distributes the same set of target functions over a
finer-grained set of call sites. Second, the analysis prunes spurious targets that
type matching conservatively admits, yielding smaller per-site ECs. Notably,
sglib-rbtree and sglib-dllist achieve a 50% EC reduction (from 2.0 to 1.0),
meaning the CFG policy narrows each call site to a single valid target—the the-
oretical optimum. Other complex benchmarks also show significant reductions:
sglib-hashtable and sglib-listinsertsort (42.9%), picojpeg (28.6%), and
mergesort (18.2%).
The largest EC observed across both policies is 9 (in wikisort and mergesort),
which is driven by a sorting-routine dispatch table. Even in this worst case the
EC remains small enough to substantially limit an attacker’s choice of targets
compared to an unprotected binary.
Among related CFI schemes, ECCut [33] reports a 94.8% average EC re-
duction over LLVM-CFI on SPEC CPU benchmarks. However, ECCut oper-
ates on large x86 applications where type-based policies produce ECs of tens to
hundreds of targets, leaving substantial room for refinement. In contrast, em-
bedded benchmarks in BEEBS inherently have fewer indirect calls and smaller

Branch Landing
17
Table 4. Compile-time equivalence class (EC) size for selected benchmarks. Call sites
= number of static indirect call sites; Avg EC = mean targets per call site; Max EC
= largest single EC.
BRL-Func
BRL-CFG
EC
Benchmark
Sites
Avg Max Sites
Avg Max Red. (%)
trio-snprintf
38
1.11
2
40
1.05
2
5.0
wikisort
34
1.35
9
36
1.28
9
5.6
trio-sscanf
17
1.24
2
20
1.05
2
15.0
miniz
16
1.75
3
19
1.47
3
15.8
nettle-aes
12
2.00
3
14
1.71
3
14.3
nettle-sha256
12
2.00
3
14
1.71
3
14.3
mergesort
9
2.33
9
11
1.91
9
18.2
picojpeg
5
1.80
2
7
1.29
2
28.6
sglib-hashtable
4
2.00
2
7
1.14
2
42.9
sglib-rbtree
4
2.00
2
8
1.00
2
50.0
sglib-dllist
4
2.00
2
8
1.00
2
50.0
All 81
5.37 1.96
9 7.47 1.32
9
32.5
ECs—our BRL-Func baseline already averages only 1.96 targets per call site. De-
spite this limited headroom, BRL-CFG still achieves a 32.5% reduction to 1.32,
demonstrating that pointer-analysis-based refinement remains effective even in
the embedded domain. Bratter [23] does not report EC size metrics; its 8-bit
tag register provides a fixed label space that cannot express per-call-site tar-
get restrictions without consuming additional tag bits, fundamentally limiting
its security granularity compared to our Bloom filter approach. As discussed in
Section 2, ECCut’s type refinements are complementary to BRL’s membership-
based enforcement and could be integrated as a policy input to further reduce
equivalence class sizes. HPCFI [16] reports similarly large reductions on SPEC
CPU through integrated static analyses; like ECCut, these analysis-level re-
finements are orthogonal to BRL’s enforcement-level contribution and could be
adopted as policy inputs within the same framework.
4.5
Runtime Verification and Protected Targets
BRL-Func protects only indirect-call targets (i.e., address-taken function en-
tries), whereas BRL-CFG additionally protects indirect-jump targets such as
switch jump-table destinations and computed-goto labels. As a result, BRL-
Func protects a mean of 2.3 targets per benchmark, while BRL-CFG increases
this number to 4.0; the increase is especially pronounced for switch-heavy bench-

18
Y. Wu et al.
marks such as cover (2 to 181), picojpeg (3 to 15), and trio-snprintf (3 to
13).
We validate correctness by executing all 81 BEEBS benchmarks on the Spike
ISA simulator, which records each brl outcome as Pass, Skip, or Fail. Across all
benchmarks and both policies, the Fail count is zero. Under BRL-CFG, the ag-
gregate Pass count increases from 124.1 M to 128.7 M, while Skip decreases from
1.84 M to 0.51 M, indicating that CFG-derived protection converts previously
unchecked transfers into actively verified ones.
5
Discussion
This section discusses two design considerations that extend beyond the core
mechanism described in Section 3: out-of-order handling for BRState and the
interpretation of the brl latency models.
5.1
BRState Under Out-of-Order Execution
Our prototype is evaluated on Spike, whose functional execution model does
not expose out-of-order (OoO) state hazards. On an OoO processor, however, a
straightforward global BRState design would require care to prevent a specula-
tive bld from overwriting the pending authorization state of an earlier indirect
transfer before the matching brl commits.
This issue can be addressed with standard commit-order design choices. For
example, the SID carried by bld can be kept in the reorder buffer and made
visible to brl only at commit time, or equivalently, BRState can be updated
only when bld commits. Under either design, squashed speculative bld instruc-
tions never update architectural authorization state, and each successful brl still
consumes exactly one committed source SID.
Therefore, the single-use authorization invariant of Branch Landing is com-
patible with OoO execution, although a full RTL design is beyond the scope
of this work. Our current evaluation focuses on the architectural mechanism
and reports performance using latency models rather than a cycle-accurate OoO
implementation.
5.2
Latency Modeling and Implementation Considerations
Branch Landing performs membership checking with a fixed number of hash
probes for a chosen filter configuration, so the modeled check latency does not
scale with the size of AllowedSources(T), but the absolute latency of brl de-
pends on how its metadata path is implemented. Our evaluation uses three
latency models—brl3, brl5, and brl10—to represent optimistic, realistic, and
conservative implementation points rather than a finalized RTL cost.
A brl execution conceptually performs four operations: (i) validate BRState.valid;
(ii) resolve the per-target filter descriptor (base, m) from the .rodata descriptor

Branch Landing
19
table using the immediate SIDT operand; (iii) compute k Bloom filter hash posi-
tions; and (iv) load the corresponding filter words and AND-reduce the sampled
bits. We estimate each step from Bloom filter hardware and cache literature.
Descriptor resolution is a read from a small read-only table keyed by SIDT .
A dedicated descriptor cache analogous to a branch target cache can serve the
lookup in 1 cycle; without it, the descriptor falls into the L1 D-cache, incurring
the ∼3-cycle hit latency typical of in-order RISC-V cores such as CVA6 [34]. Hash
computation uses double hashing [17] to derive k filter positions from two base
hashes h1 and h2; a simple universal hash such as H3 [8] or the ultra-low-latency
Xoodoo-NC [27] completes both base hashes combinationally in a single cycle.
Filter bit probes require one memory read per position; hardware Bloom filter
studies [13,27] report 1–2 cycle BRAM access when the filter is banked, while a
general-purpose L1 D-cache read inherits the 1–3 cycle cache-hit latency [11,34].
AND reduction and BRState clearing are a single cycle of combinational logic.
Under the brl3 model we assume a descriptor-cache hit, a compact filter
stored adjacent to its descriptor, and parallel hash/filter access (cycle 1: descrip-
tor lookup and valid check; cycle 2: parallel hash computation and filter word
access; cycle 3: AND-reduce and commit). The brl5 model drops the descriptor
cache and serves the descriptor from the L1 D-cache, overlapped with a 1-cycle
hash and a 1-cycle filter probe plus AND/commit. The brl10 model corresponds
to a fully serialized implementation with no dedicated optimizations: 3 cycles for
descriptor load, 1 for hash, 3 for filter word load, 1 for AND, and 2 for BRState
commit and pipeline refill.
Across all three models, the qualitative conclusions of our evaluation remain
unchanged: Branch Landing continues to incur low estimated runtime overhead
while preserving source-aware authorization. A full cycle-accurate RTL study of
these implementation choices is left to future work.
6
Conclusion
This paper presents Branch Landing, a forward-edge CFI framework for RISC-
V that introduces Bloom filter-based source authorization to close the source-
domain gap left by existing type-based and tag-based mechanisms. Two lightweight
ISA extensions, bld and brl, propagate and validate source Section Identifiers
through a dedicated BRState register, achieving fixed-probe membership veri-
fication whose latency is independent of the authorized-set size, scaling to an
arbitrary number of authorized callers. The policy-agnostic design allows both
type-based and CFG-derived authorization to be instantiated within the same
hardware substrate. Evaluation on 81 BEEBS benchmarks confirms mean run-
time overheads below 0.5% under the primary latency models, with the conser-
vative 10-cycle sensitivity point remaining below 1.3%, a 32.5% equivalence class
reduction under the CFG-derived policy, and zero enforcement failures on the
exercised benchmark executions.

20
Y. Wu et al.