Resolving Conflicts Between RTOS Timekeeping and
Uninterruptable Trusted Computing
Antonio Joia Neto
University of Zurich
ajneto@ifi.uzh.ch
Amarin Laohajirapan
Prince of Songkla University
laoamarin@gmail.com
Norrathep Rattanavipanon
Prince of Songkla University
norrathep.r@phuket.psu.ac.th
Ivan De Oliveira Nunes
University of Zurich
nunes@ifi.uzh.ch
Abstract
Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) on low-power microcon-
trollers (e.g., ARM TrustZone-M) enable isolation of Secure and
Non-Secure software but still require both worlds to share resources,
including interrupt controllers. In this model, real-time applications
and real-time operating systems (RTOS-s) are executed in the Non-
Secure sub-system, whereas the Secure sub-system is typically
reserved for a small set of pre-defined security (e.g., cryptographic)
operations referred to as trusted computing services. However,
many RTOS-s rely on periodic interrupts (SysTicks) to advance
their own notion of time (time-keeping), and the delivery of this
interrupt is essential for preserving real-time behavior. On the other
hand, the security of many trusted computing services requires
atomicity vis-a-vis the Non-Secure sub-system (where the RTOS
resides), precluding SysTick handling.
This paper first characterizes this conflict and then introduces
a Secure-driven time synchronization mechanism in which the
Secure World measures elapsed time and compensates the Non-
Secure RTOS by unobtrusively updating the RTOS time-keeping
data structures with the appropriate number of missed ticks before
re-enabling interrupts and resuming the execution of the Non-
Secure system. This approach restores a consistent, monotonic
notion of time across worlds and enables secure coexistence of
trusted computing services and RTOS-s on microcontrollers. Im-
portantly, the proposed approach requires no modifications to the
underlying RTOS and yields no significant run-time overhead.
1
Introduction
Embedded devices are ubiquitous, supporting applications that
range from personal home automation (e.g., smart homes) to public,
safety-critical environments (e.g., hospital machinery). As soci-
ety grows more dependent on these devices, they have naturally
become a high-value target for malware infestation attacks. To
safeguard these systems, modern embedded platforms are now
commonly equipped with Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs),
which isolate security-critical operations from potentially applica-
tion software. Among these, ARM TrustZone-M has emerged as the
leading TEE for microcontroller (MCU)-class devices. TrustZone-M
enforces isolation by dividing runtime execution into two hardware-
enforced domains: the Secure World and the Non-Secure World.
The Secure World can provide several trusted computing services,
such as cryptographic functions, authenticated code updates/hot
patching [31, 35], remote attestation [4, 16–18, 20, 21, 27, 37], control-
flow integrity/attestation [1–3, 10, 13, 14, 34, 41, 43, 46], and more.
To maintain run-time integrity, these services are commonly de-
signed to run atomically. This is enforced by disabling Non-Secure
World interrupts during their execution [11, 13, 36, 37]. For example,
a Secure World hot-patching service must not be interrupted by the
Non-Secure World; otherwise, malware residing in the Non-Secure
World could abuse an intermediate state to alter the patch content
before completion of the patching process. Similarly, in remote
attestation, malware could interrupt the measurement process and
relocate itself into a memory region that has already been measured
to evade detection [12, 15, 18].
In the context of real-time embedded systems, the Non-Secure
World likely hosts a real-time operating system (RTOS), includ-
ing its kernel and application tasks. As temporal predictability is
essential in such systems, the RTOS kernel heavily relies on peri-
odic interrupts, notably the SysTick interrupt, to provide core func-
tionality such as task scheduling, timeout handling, and deadline
enforcement. The timely availability of these interrupts is there-
fore crucial: even small disruptions in tick delivery can accumulate
over time, leading to clock drift/incorrect time-keeping, ultimately
undermining real-time guarantees.
In this work, we show that this requirement from RTOS has a se-
vere direct conflict with the security requirements of TEE’s trusted
computing services: when the Secure World executes a service
atomically, it disables Non-Secure interrupts, thereby preventing
the SysTick interrupt from firing in the Non-Secure World. As a
result, the RTOS may miss (potentially many) SysTick events, re-
sulting in a gap in its notion of time, gradually diverging its internal
clock from the real time.
Prior work on TrustZone-M–based trusted computing services
(see Section8) largely overlooks this issue. While some approaches
aim to keep trusted execution very fast and frequent (e.g., atomic
security checks for control-flow integrity) to reduce schedulability
interference, they fail to account for the impact on system time-
keeping caused by blocking the SysTick interrupt. As we show in
this work, even such fast atomic operations can still cause SysTick
events to be missed; when this occurs frequently, the resulting
tick losses are amplified, accumulating over time. Moreover, this
phenomenon is also overlooked in traditional real-time analysis,
which typically assumes that non-preemptive sections—including
those that block interrupts—operate within a single scheduling do-
main (i.e., the same privilege level) under one operating system
or scheduler [40]. TEEs shift away from this assumption in multi-
ple ways. Being on a different privilege level, their execution time
is dependent on dynamic security workloads; they can globally
arXiv:2604.24277v2 [cs.CR] 28 Apr 2026

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Antonio Joia Neto, Amarin Laohajirapan, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Ivan De Oliveira Nunes
disable Non-Secure interrupts; and their timing is opaque to the
Non-Secure RTOS. As a result, their interference cannot be properly
modeled or bounded using conventional scheduling frameworks
unless explicitly accounted for.
After introducing and characterizing this problem, we propose
a mechanism to preserve RTOS time-keeping correctness across
the execution of atomic trusted services. Specifically, our goal is
to ensure that, when control returns to the Non-Secure World,
the RTOS observes the same kernel-visible state it would have
observed had all elapsed tick periods been accounted for correctly.
This state includes correct logical tick advancement, release of
overdue delayed tasks, expiration of crossed timeouts, preservation
of software timer state, and correct reschedule state.
Contribution. This paper makes the following contributions:
• Characterization of Cross-World Timing Drift. We show
that atomic Secure-world execution in TrustZone-M can sup-
press multiple SysTick expirations, causing the Non-Secure
RTOS to undercount time. We formalize this behavior, derive
bounds on drift accumulation, and empirically validate the
model through experiments on two major embedded RTOS-s
(FreeRTOS [22] and Zephyr [47]) running atop a real ARM
Cortex-M33 hardware platform.
• Cross-World Time Reconciliation. We propose a light-
weight mechanism in which the Secure World maintains a
trusted monotonic time reference to track suppressed ticks
and transparently reconciles them with the RTOS once the
atomic execution of a trusted service completes. As a result,
our approach preserves the atomicity required by trusted
services while maintaining proper RTOS time progression,
providing required guarantees without requiring hardware
modifications or changes to the underlying RTOS or applica-
tion logic. This makes our mechanism readily deployable on
existing TrustZone-M devices in real-time environments and
compatible with existing applications. We release an open-
source prototype realizing the proposed mechanism [5].
• Control System Case Study. We contextualize the practical
impact of Cross-World time drift on a closed-loop control
system of a DC motor (speed and position control). These
experiments show that uncompensated clock drifts due to
SysTick suppression can introduce missed control releases,
increased tracking error, and control-signal disturbances.
The proposed compensation mechanism successfully reme-
diates the issue, preserving timing and control behavior.
2
Background
ARM TrustZone for Cortex-M. TrustZone-M implements a hardware-
enforced split between a Secure and a Non-Secure world on ARM
Cortex-M MCUs. Each world maintains its own memory map, ex-
ception vectors, and execution context, while sharing the same CPU
core and interrupt controller. The processor transitions between
worlds via Secure Gateways and Non-Secure Callable interfaces.
Interrupts are globally managed by the Nested Vectored Interrupt
Controller (NVIC), which prioritizes Secure interrupts over Non-
Secure ones. As a result, Secure code that temporarily disables
interrupts can block or delay Non-Secure interrupt delivery, includ-
ing periodic SysTicks.
SysTick Timer and Real-Time Scheduling. In many embed-
ded RTOS-s, including FreeRTOS [22], ThreadX [19], and Zephyr [47],
the periodic SysTick interrupt provides the primary timekeeping
used by the scheduler. It increments a global tick counter, which
drives all time-based services available to applications, including
task delays (vTaskDelay), periodic task release (vTaskDelayUntil),
timeout expiration in synchronization primitives (e.g., xSemaphoreTake
with timeout), software timers, and, when enabled, round-robin
time slicing among tasks of equal priority. Thus, the tick establishes
the pacing of application-level temporal behavior. However, the
RTOS kernel itself usually does not rely on the tick counter to ex-
ecute its internal operations; kernel functions, context switches,
ISR execution, and scheduling decisions are event-driven and not
measured or timed using the tick count. In other words, the kernel
maintains correctness without reference to real time, while applica-
tions depend on the tick to express temporal intent. This means that
disruption in tick delivery does not violate functional correctness
of the kernel but distorts the temporal behavior of tasks, causing
delays, missed periods, and divergence between logical (tick-based)
and physical (wall-clock) times.
Trusted Computing Services in the Secure World. The Se-
cure World can host several security mechanisms that inherently
execute uninterruptible sequences to preserve integrity and prevent
transient state exposure. Examples include cryptographic opera-
tions, which must complete atomically to avoid leaking partially up-
dated key-dependent state [30]; control-flow integrity and control-
flow attestation mechanisms, which maintain runtime hash chains
or cumulative measurement registers that must be updated consis-
tently to prevent forgery or replay [3]; software-fault isolation tech-
niques [7, 23, 42] and authenticated hot patching routines, which
disable interrupts while modifying or measuring code regions to
prevent race conditions and Time-of-Check-to-Time-of-Use (TOC-
TOU) attacks [9, 18]. Although these mechanisms serve different
purposes, they share a common characteristic: each temporarily
grants the Secure World exclusive CPU control and masks all Non-
Secure interrupts. From the perspective of the Non-Secure RTOS,
these pause intervals create invisible and unpredictable pause in
SysTick delivery, directly affecting timekeeping precision.
3
System & Threat Models
System Model. In this work, we consider an MCU with TEE sup-
port (e.g. Arm Cortex-M with TrustZone-M), consisting of the Se-
cure World and Non-Secure World that execute on the same phys-
ical core. The Secure World contains trusted code (Secure Frame-
work) that implements one or many trusted computing services
(aka. “secure” or “trusted” services), as described in Section 2. The
Non-Secure World contains a preemptive RTOS and application
tasks. The Secure World holds higher privilege over the interrupt
controller (NVIC) and can globally disable/mask interrupts, tem-
porarily blocking their delivery to either domain. The RTOS as-
sumes that SysTick interrupts occur periodically and uses them
to maintain its time notion, which in turn drives task scheduling
decisions. The Secure World, however, may execute secure services
atomically (by disabling interrupts). The duration and frequency of
this atomic execution depends on the security workload. Thus, the
exact duration is not predictable.

Resolving Conflicts Between RTOS Timekeeping and Uninterruptable Trusted Computing
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 1: SysTick loss diagram
Threat Model. Our threat model is consistent with the standard
TEE adversary model [6]. In this model, the entire Non-Secure
World, including application tasks and the RTOS (along with its
SysTick handler), is distrusted by the Secure World; that is, the
Secure World should remain secure even if the Non-Secure World
contains a vulnerability that can be compromised by the Adversary
(Adv). Indeed, this assumption has motivated the need for atomic
execution in many existing secure services to ensure that their
execution integrity and data confidentiality cannot be tampered
with through Adv-controlled Non-Secure World interrupts. This
also implies that any mechanism designed to reconcile temporal
drift must remain secure under this threat model, i.e., it must not
open a new door for the Adv to compromise secure services.
4
Problem Formulation & Characterization
4.1
The Cause of Time Drifts
To understand how temporal drift occurs, we consider a simple
example from the execution timeline in Figure 1. In this setting,
the RTOS is configured with a SysTick period of 𝑇tick, i.e., under
normal operations, the SysTick interrupt fires every 𝑇tick seconds
to increment the tick counter: Tick++.
Suppose a secure service begins execution at time 𝑡0, which
takes place 𝜙𝑖seconds after the last tick delivery and its atomic
execution lasts for 𝐴𝑖. Upon entry, the secure service disables Non-
Secure interrupts, as required to preserve the integrity of its security
operation. As a consequence, when the next SysTick event occurs
at time 𝑡1, the SysTick handler cannot interrupt to run. In this case,
the NVIC sets the SysTick pending flag (in hardware) to 1 hoping
that SysTick can be delivered as soon as interrupts are re-enabled.
With 𝐴𝑖> 𝑇tick, an additional SysTick event is expected at time
𝑡2, but it is also blocked from running. Since the SysTick pending
flag is a single bit, it can record only one pending expiration: the first
missed SysTick becomes pending, while all subsequent expirations
are silently discarded. When the secure service completes at time
𝑡0+𝐴𝑖and re-enables Non-Secure interrupts, the NVIC immediately
delivers a single deferred SysTick interrupt to the RTOS. As a result,
the second SysTick event is lost, causing the RTOS to undercount
by one tick.
This example illustrates one tick loss. However, it is easy to see
that the total number of lost ticks can vary, depending on 𝑇tick,
𝐴𝑖, and the number of times the secure service executes. Next, we
provide a formal model of tick loss based on these parameters.
4.2
Tick Loss Model
Let 𝑇tick be the SysTick period, 𝐴𝑖the duration of the 𝑖-th atomic
section (from a secure service), and 𝜙𝑖∈𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚[0,𝑇tick) the
offset from the previous delivered tick at the moment the atomic
section begins. For simplicity, we assume that the execution time
of the SysTick handler is negligible and thus do not account for it
explicitly in our model.
During the interval 𝐴𝑖, the SysTick timer may expire multiple
times. The number of SysTick timer expirations during this interval
can be computed as:
𝑘𝑖(𝜙𝑖) =
𝜙𝑖+ 𝐴𝑖
𝑇tick

.
(1)
Because the NVIC can buffer at most one pending SysTick interrupt,
only the first expiration is delivered after unmasking; the remaining
(𝑘𝑖(𝜙𝑖) −1) are lost. Thus, the number of lost ticks for the 𝑖-th
masked interval is
Δ𝑖(𝜙𝑖) = max(0, 𝑘𝑖(𝜙𝑖) −1) .
(2)
Over an execution interval up to time 𝑡, let A(𝑡) denote the set
of Secure atomic sections. The cumulative drift experienced by the
Non-Secure RTOS is
Δ(𝑡) =
∑︁
𝐴𝑖∈A(𝑡)
Δ𝑖(𝜙𝑖).
(3)
Expected Drift Rate. Assume atomic sections occur with av-
erage frequency 𝑓atomic. For an atomic section of fixed duration 𝐴,
if the start phase 𝜙is uniformly distributed in [0,𝑇tick), then the
expected number of lost ticks is
E𝜙[Δ(𝐴𝑖,𝜙)] = max

0, 𝐴𝑖
𝑇tick
−1

.
(4)
Therefore, if durations vary across invocations, the expected drift
rate is
E[ ¤Δ] = 𝑓atomic E𝐴𝑖

max

0, 𝐴
𝑇tick
−1

.
(5)
Using only the mean duration ¯𝐴we can reach the following ap-
proximation
E[ ¤Δ] ≈𝑓atomic max

0,
¯𝐴
𝑇tick
−1

,
(6)
As a result, we see that temporal drift observed by RTOS grows
linearly with the rate of Secure atomic operations and with the
number of tick periods they span.
4.3
Time Drift Empirically
To empirically demonstrate the practical impact of this problem
and validate our tick loss model, we performed experiments with
four atomic secure services in the Secure World: (1) control-flow
integrity (CFI) enforcement combining forward-edge checks [44]
with a protected shadow stack [48], (2) software-fault isolation
(SFI) following the design of [23] adapted to TrustZone, (3) remote
attestation measurement, and (4) a hot-patching service.
First, we evaluate time-drift effects for CFI and SFI, both of which
are directly influeced by application characteristics. These services
rely on atomic security checks executed in the Secure World to

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Antonio Joia Neto, Amarin Laohajirapan, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Ivan De Oliveira Nunes
Figure 2: Drifted RTOS notion of time (CFI).
Figure 3: Drifted RTOS notion of time (SFI).
ensure that tasks follow valid control-flow paths (CFI) or adhere
to memory-access constraints (SFI). Because different applications
trigger these checks at different frequencies, the density of security-
check operations varies across workloads, leading to different val-
ues of E
 ¤Δ

(Equation 6). To quantify these effects, we instrument
several MCU workloads commonly used in similar research: Heart
Rate Monitoring (hr_monitor), Discrete Fourier Transform (dft),
GPS Parser (gps), Sorted Search Benchmark (sglib), CRC32 (crc),
and Primality Testing (prime). All applications run continuously
under FreeRTOS on an ARM Cortex-M33 MCU. The SysTick period
is set to 𝑇tick = 0.1 ms.
The results in Figure 2 and Figure 3 highlight several key ob-
servations. All applications introduce measurable deviations in the
RTOS’s notion of time, and the magnitude of this drift depends on
both the workload characteristics and the instrumentation tech-
nique. Each application exhibits a distinct linear time drift incre-
ment of rate E
 ¤Δ

, visible in the slope of the plotted curves. As
expected, CFI introduces greater time drift in programs with many
instrumented branches. SFI, which instruments every memory ac-
cess and therefore triggers secure services far more frequently,
leads to an even larger drift. These deviations accumulate linearly
with operational time, meaning that the longer the MCU runs, the
larger the discrepancy becomes in the RTOS’s timekeeping (e.g.,
over weeks or months of deployment).
Next, we evaluate attestation and hot-patching, which are stand-
alone secure services and therefore not tied to specific application
workloads. These services typically run a lower 𝑓atomic than CFI or
SFI, but each invocation takes longer ¯𝐴. To quantify the resulting
drift, we measure the total discrepancy between real elapsed time
and the RTOS’s tick-based notion of time immediately after each
secure operation completes. Each experiment is repeated five times
to capture run-to-run consistency.
For the attestation experiment, the secure service measures the
Non-Secure World’s flash region with 256KB. For hot-patching,
the secure service installs a 128KB flash binary image, producing
a substantially longer atomic execution window ¯𝐴. Both services
were evaluated on FreeRTOS and Zephyr running atop an ARM
Cortex-M33 MCU, with a SysTick period of 𝑇tick = 0.1 ms.
Table 1 reports the average and maximum drift (in milliseconds)
observed at the end of each atomic operation. Each measurement
corresponds to the difference between physical elapsed time and
the RTOS-reported tick count, accumulated entirely during the
interval in which Non-Secure interrupts were masked.
Table 1: RTOS Time Drift for Stand-Alone Secure Services.
Service
RTOS
Avg. Drift (ms)
Max. Drift (ms)
Hot-Patching
FreeRTOS
2910.0
2911
Hot-Patching
Zephyr
2917.2
2918
Attestation
FreeRTOS
238.0
238
Attestation
Zephyr
202.0
202
The experiments show consistent drifts across all repetitions and
both RTOS configurations. Hot-patching introduces approximately
2.9 seconds of lost time per invocation in both FreeRTOS and Zephyr.
This behavior is expected: installing a 128 KB binary requires a
long atomic operation, during which thousands of SysTick periods
elapse without being delivered. The consistency across the two
RTOSes further indicates that the drift is architectural rather than
OS-specific. Attestation produces a smaller, yet still significant, drift
of 238 ms on FreeRTOS and 202 ms on Zephyr, in both cases leading
to substantial SysTick losses at each invocation.
4.4
Implications
Our model indicates that enforcing atomic execution for secure
services leads to drifts in the RTOS’s notion of time. This accumu-
lates linearly with respect to the execution time of atomic security
services and the configured SysTick frequency. This behavior is
confirmed empirically in Section 4.3. As the RTOS relies on SysTick
events for task scheduling, such drift delays subsequent executions
of real-time application tasks, affects their temporal correctness, and
can ultimately jeopardize system safety. For instance, in a control-
loop application inside an autonomous vehicle, accumulated drift
may delay obstacle detection and consequently cause braking to
happen too late, creating a serious safety hazard to the passengers.
In Section 7, we show this impact in practice with a control system
case study.
4.5
Kernel Effects of Missed Ticks
A missed SysTick affects more than just the value of a global tick
counter. In RTOS-s, each tick may trigger kernel-visible state tran-
sitions that determine when tasks become runnable and whether

Resolving Conflicts Between RTOS Timekeeping and Uninterruptable Trusted Computing
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Figure 4: Secure Services and NS SysTick Pipeline Diagram.
scheduling decisions must change. As a result, simply repairing a
scalar notion of time (by correcting the tick value) after a Secure
atomic interval is not sufficient to restore the correct RTOS state.
In particular, missed ticks may suppress delayed-task releases, hide
timeout expirations in blocking synchronization primitives, skip
software-timer progression, and alter scheduler-visible state, for
example by advancing round-robin slice behavior or by making a
higher-priority task ready. Consequently, even if the tick counter
is corrected, the RTOS may still exhibit incorrect behavior in task
scheduling and timer management. Therefore, preserving RTOS
timer correctness requires reconstructing all timer-visible kernel
effects of the missed ticks, in addition to restoring the tick count.
5
Reconciling Secure Atomic Operations and
RTOS-s
5.1
High-Level Overview
We introduce a mechanism that preserves the atomic execution
of secure services while maintaining accurate Non-Secure RTOS
timekeeping. The key idea is to temporarily shift the responsibility
for updating the Non-Secure tick state to the Secure World during
atomic execution, replicating the RTOS’s time-keeping operations
on its behalf without requiring any modifications to the under-
lying RTOS. We present the design targeting FreeRTOS, but the
mechanism relies only on kernel primitives common to tick-driven
RTOS-s (e.g., a global tick counter, blocked-task lists, and software
timer queues); porting to a different RTOS requires only adapting
the reconstruction logic to that kernel’s internal data layouts, but
the overall approach and its security properties remain unchanged.
Figure 4 illustrates the standard Non-Secure SysTick workflow
(black arrows) and our modified flow (blue arrows). Our design
introduces two new components in the Secure World: the Secure
Service Setup and the Secure NS SysTick Handler. When a secure
service is called by the Non-Secure World, the Secure Service Setup
configures interrupt routing so that the Non-Secure SysTick inter-
rupt is handled by a Secure interrupt handler. Once this redirection
is in place, it starts executing the requested secure service.
During secure service execution, the SysTick timer hardware
peripheral associated with the Non-Secure World continues to oper-
ate normally: its counter decrements, reaches zero, reloads, and sets
its pending bit. However, due to the redirection configured earlier,
the exception is dispatched to the Secure interrupt vector table,
which invokes the (Secure World-resident) NS SysTick Handler.
This handler mimics the behavior expected from the Non-Secure
World, updating the Non-Secure tick state, i.e., Tick Counter in
Figure 4, on behalf of the RTOS, and then returns control to the
secure service once the update is complete.
When the secure service function is finished, control returns
to the Secure Service Setup, which restores the original SysTick
interrupt routing so that subsequent SysTick interrupts are again
delivered to the Non-Secure interrupt handler. At that point, the
RTOS resumes execution with a tick counter that already accounts
for all ticks that occurred while its own handler in the Non-Secure
World was prevented from running.
In the following subsections, we discuss specific technical chal-
lenges of realizing this high-level idea on existing RTOS systems.
5.2
Addressing and Registration of the
Non-Secure Kernel Structures
First, the Secure NS SysTick Handler must correctly locate and up-
date the Non-Secure kernel structures: the tick counter, the delayed-
task and timeout lists, the software timer queue, and the round-
robin scheduling state (see Figure 4).
To accomplish this, we extract the addresses of all relevant struc-
tures from the Non-Secure World binary. This can be done using
symbol information, linking-time metadata, and pattern matching
over the binary image. We then embed the discovered addresses
into the a reserved memory space as constants. At runtime, we im-
plement the Secure NS SysTick handler to use this constant pointers
to apply the updates exactly as the Non-Secure kernel would. From
the perspective of the Non-Secure code, the tick structure is up-
dated as if the original Non-Secure handler had run, even though
the actual updates come from the Secure World.
The main benefit of this approach is that neither the RTOS nor
the application tasks in the Non-Secure World need to be changed.
This makes it readily deployable and fully compatible with existing
real-time applications. Kernel structure addresses can conversely
be implemented as Secure World configurable parameters based on
the information extracted from the Non-Secure World binary.
5.3
SysTick Handler Semantic Reconstruction
As discussed in Section 4.5, advancing the tick counter alone is
insufficient to restore RTOS time consistency. To fully recover it,
the Secure NS SysTick Handler operates in two phases. A light-
weight handler runs on each intercepted tick solely to increment
the tick counter and track the number of elapsed ticks. Once the
secure operation completes, a single reconstruction sweep applies
all remaining kernel state updates at once, avoiding the overhead of
running the full handler on every tick. Importantly, this sweep does
not introduce new logic: it replicates the same operations that the
original RTOS handler would perform, although performed from
within the Secure World.
Let 𝑛denote the number of intercepted ticks during the atomic
execution and ˆ𝑡= 𝑡0 + 𝑛the resulting absolute tick count, where 𝑡0
is the tick count at secure service entry.
5.3.1
Operation on Every SysTick.
Tick update. On every intercepted SysTick interrupt, the Sy-
sTick handler directly increments Tick counter by one, mirroring

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Antonio Joia Neto, Amarin Laohajirapan, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Ivan De Oliveira Nunes
the Non-Secure handler, while maintaining an internal counter to
track𝑛. If the Tick counter variable overflows, an overflow flag is set
to ensure the reconstruction sweep accounts for the wrap-around
when later updating kernel state.
5.3.2
Operations on the Reconstruction Sweep.
Delayed-task and timeout reconstruction. The RTOS main-
tains a linked list of blocked tasks, each annotated with the tick
value at which it should be promoted to the ready state. On exit
from the atomic security service, a single pass over the blocked list
is performed, promoting every entry with wake time ≤ˆ𝑡to the
ready list. This is semantically equivalent to per-tick sweeping be-
cause task readiness is a threshold condition: a task becomes ready
if and only if the current tick count has reached its wake time, re-
gardless of which tick first crossed that threshold. Tasks blocked on
synchronization primitives with a timeout (e.g. xSemaphoreTake
with a finite timeout) are handled identically, as the RTOS encodes
their expiration as a delayed-task wake time.
Software timer reconstruction. FreeRTOS software timers
are not advanced inside the SysTick ISR. Instead, each tick enqueues
a message to a dedicated timer service task, which sweeps the timer
list and fires expired callbacks on its next execution. During the
atomic window, no such messages were sent, leaving the timer task
unaware that time had passed. Before exiting, the Secure World
compensates by posting a single 𝑛-tick command to the timer queue
and setting the appropriate flag (xTimerListsWereSwitched on
FreeRTOS), which additionally forces the timer task to check the
overflow list. On its next execution (in Non-Secure World), the
timer task uses this list to expire all timers whose periods have
elapsed during the atomic security service execution.
Round-robin reconstruction. When multiple tasks of equal
priority share the CPU, FreeRTOS allocates each a fixed time-slice
of 𝑄ticks and rotates to the next task when that slice expires. If
the atomic window spans enough ticks, multiple rotations may
have been due. Let 𝑠denote the number of slice ticks remaining
for the currently running task at window entry. The number of
full rotations that should have occurred is 𝑚= ⌊(𝑛+ 𝑄−𝑠)/𝑄⌋:
the first rotation completes after 𝑠ticks (exhausting the current
task’s remaining slice), and each subsequent rotation completes
after every 𝑄ticks thereafter. The residual slice for the task that
should be active upon return is 𝑠′ = 𝑄−((𝑛+ 𝑄−𝑠) mod 𝑄). The
reconstruction sweep advances the round-robin ready-list pointer
by 𝑚positions (modulo the number of equal-priority ready tasks)
and writes 𝑠′ as the new slice counter, ensuring no task receives
more or less CPU time than it would have under uninterrupted
operation. When 𝑚= 0, no rotation occurred and the handler
simply decrements the current slice counter by 𝑛.
Reschedule. If any task was promoted to the ready list with
priority exceeding that of the task currently at the head of the
ready queue, the atomic operation exit routine sets PendSV before
returning, which triggers an immediate context switch on re-entry
to the Non-Secure world.
Pointer validation. During the reconstruction sweep, the han-
dler de-references pointers not extracted from the Non-Secure
binary at compile time (e.g, linked list pxNext, pxPrevious, and
pxOwner fields within dynamically allocated). Before each de-
reference, the handler validates that the pointer falls within the
Non-Secure memory range, and generates a fault if not. This en-
sures a compromised Non-Secure World cannot redirect its pointers
into Secure memory.
5.4
Security Analysis and Correctness
We argue security and correctness (in terms of time-keeping) of
the proposed mechanism, that is: at the end of a secure service
execution, the RTOS fully recovers all tick losses and related state as
if interrupts had never been disabled, while maintaining all atomic
security execution required by the TEE-based security service.
Atomicity Preservation. To remain secure under the threat
model described in Section 3, our mechanism must ensure that
Non-Secure code cannot interrupt execution of a secure service.
Our approach does not modify the execution of the secure service
itself. The Secure NS SysTick Handler only executes by preempting
within the secure service’s Secure execution context and, since the
Non-Secure World is already prevented from running during this
interval, it cannot interfere with either the secure service or the
handler. Adv may attempt to interrupt the Secure Service Setup
at either the entry to or the exit from the Secure World. However,
such interruptions cannot affect the integrity of the secure service’s
execution, as they occur strictly before the service begins or after
it has already completed.
Non-Secure Privilege Boundary. The Secure NS SysTick Han-
dler accesses Non-Secure RTOS structures using compile-time-
fixed addresses embedded in Secure firmware. Kernel state, the
tick counter, and list head structures are statically allocated and
never influenced by Non-Secure input at runtime. For pointers not
extracted from the binary at compile time, the handler relies on the
validation described in Section 5.3.2, ensuring that a compromised
Non-Secure World cannot redirect pointers into Secure memory.
Since these structures are already fully accessible to any Non-Secure
code, Adv gains no additional leverage from the handler: any cor-
ruption achievable indirectly through the reconstruction sweep
could equally be performed by directly modifying the RTOS kernel
structures.
Tick Correctness. The mechanism guarantees that every Sy-
sTick expiration is captured exactly once. The Secure handler inter-
cepts all tick events while atomic services run, avoiding the NVIC’s
single-pending-bit limitation and preventing loss of interrupts. The
handler computes the exact number of elapsed periods from the
trusted SysTick hardware state, ensuring that no additional or spu-
rious ticks are introduced. Upon secure service exit, the handler
replays the kernel-visible effects of all missed ticks in a single sweep.
Consequently, the RTOS observes a tick stream that is free of drift.
This preserves the behavior of all timekeeping-dependent RTOS
services.
Remark. Note that timekeeping correctness (the goal of the pro-
posed approach) does not imply schedulability. If a task, whether
TEE-based or not, cannot be scheduled alongside others in the system,
this remains a fundamental scheduling issue independent of TEEs or
atomic trusted computing services. Our mechanism addresses only
timekeeping consistency and does not attempt to remedy infeasible or
incorrect schedules involving either non-secure tasks, secure tasks, or
combinations of both. The latter is an orthogonal problem.

Resolving Conflicts Between RTOS Timekeeping and Uninterruptable Trusted Computing
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Algorithm 1: Periodic PID Control Task in FreeRTOS
Input: Reference measurement 𝜔ref, gains 𝐾𝑝, 𝐾𝑖, 𝐾𝑑,
control period 𝑇ctrl
1 lastWakeTime = xTaskGetTickCount();
2 period = MS_TO_TICKS(𝑇ctrl);
3 prevError = 0;
4 integral = 0;
5 while true do
6
measurement = read_sensor();
7
error = 𝜔ref - measurement;
8
integral = integral + error ·𝑇ctrl;
9
derivative = (error - prevError) / 𝑇ctrl;
10
control = 𝐾𝑝· error + 𝐾𝑖· integral + 𝐾𝑑· derivative;
11
set_actuator(control);
12
prevError = error;
13
vTaskDelayUntil(&lastWakeTime, period);
14
nextWakeTime = lastWakeTime + period;
6
Evaluation
We evaluate our approach on two TrustZone-M MCUs that both
implement the ARM Cortex-M33 architecture: the Raspberry Pi
Pico 2 (RP2350) and the STM32L552. Although they differ in vendor-
specific peripherals, the results for the same configuration (10kHz
tick frequency, Secure code, and workload) were effectively identical
on both devices. For clarity, we therefore report a single value
representing both devices. Our implementation is fully open-source
and available at [5].
Interrupt Overhead. Handling SysTick in the Secure World
introduces only a small and predictable processing overhead. The
Secure handler executes a short sequence of operations, reading the
SysTick registers, computing the number of elapsed tick periods,
updating the Non Secure tick structure, and issuing the required
memory barriers. This sequence takes on average of CPU 120 cycles
on FreeRTOS and 172 cycles on Zephyr.
On platforms with a single shared SysTick unit, any SysTick
expiration that occurs during an atomic Secure operation is fully
serviced within the Secure World, not introducing observable inter-
rupt latency. In contrast, platforms that provide a dedicated Secure
SysTick unit incur an additional cost: each expiration triggers a
banked interrupt transition between the Secure and Non-Secure
Worlds. This cross-world transition introduces an average latency
of about 32 cycles per event.
Trusted Computing Base (TCB) Footprint. The proposed
approach introduces a small amount of code in the Secure World.
This includes initialization routines that configure the interrupt con-
troller and the Secure SysTick handler that reproduces the minimal
behavior of the original Non-Secure handler to maintain correct
timekeeping. The implementation requires 118 lines of code on
FreeRTOS and 280 lines of code on Zephyr.
Drift Elimination. We re-evaluated all timing-drift scenarios
from Section 4.3 using periodic atomic security services that block
Non-Secure interrupts. With the proposed mechanism enabled, the
drift is eliminated in every case: across all tested configurations, the
Non-Secure tick counter remains aligned with the Secure-world
reference time to within a single tick for the entire experiment,
with no observable long-term divergence.
7
Case Study
We here evaluate the practical impact of the problem introduced in
this paper and the proposed mitigation. To this end, we instantiate
two control systems running based on FreeRTOS: a DC-motor speed
controller (referred to as Plant 1) and a DC-motor position con-
troller (referred to as Plant 2). Motor control is a natural benchmark
because it is both time-sensitive and widespread in safety-critical
embedded system settings.
7.1
Settings
Both plants use a 10 kHz tick and a control period of 𝑇ctrl = 20 ms,
i.e., the interval at which the controller recalibrates its input based
on sensor feedback. We compare three execution modes throughout:
Baseline (no Secure-world interference/no frozen ticks), Uncom-
pensated (missed ticks are not corrected), and Compensated (with
our mechanism deployed).
Many periodic FreeRTOS controllers use vTaskDelayUntil() to
enforce a constant release period. As shown in Algorithm 1, the task
stores its previous release time in xLastWakeTime and blocks until
the next expected release, computed as xLastWakeTime + xPeriod,
where xPeriod is the control period expressed in ticks. This as-
sumes that the RTOS tick counter advances at the same pace as real
(wall-clock) time. When a Secure-World atomic service suppresses
SysTick events, the tick counter stalls. vTaskDelayUntil then con-
cludes the task is ahead of schedule and inserts an extra blocking
interval, causing the task to wake late in wall-clock time. However,
the control system still evaluates with Δ𝑡used = 𝑇ctrl (lines 8–9),
while the plant has evolved for Δ𝑡real = 𝑇ctrl + Δlost. No exception
is raised and no flag is set; the mismatch is entirely silent to the
application.
Plant 1 uses a DC-motor angular-velocity Proportional-Integral-
Derivative (PID) controller with dynamics ¤𝜔= −(𝐵/𝐽)𝜔+(𝐾𝑡/𝐽𝑅𝑎)𝑢
with 𝐽= 0.008, 𝐵= 0.08, 𝐾𝑡= 0.6, 𝑅𝑎= 1, clamp ±24 V, where 𝜔
is the motor angular velocity, ¤𝜔is its time derivative (that is, the
angular acceleration), and 𝑢is the control input voltage applied by
the controller. The controller wakes up periodically and updates 𝑢
so that the motor speed 𝜔tracks the reference trajectory
𝜔ref(𝑡) = 100 + 15 sin(4𝜋𝑡)
rad s−1.
(7)
An atomic secure service stream begins at 𝑡= 5 s and repeats every
𝑇atomic = 10 ms (100 Hz); each event freezes Non-Secure SysTick for
𝑁atomic = 2 ticks. Because the NVIC credits only one deferred tick
on resumption, each event produces a net loss of 𝑁atomic ≠𝑁lost = 1
ticks. The offset compounds monotonically: after 𝐾events the
Uncompensated release schedule lags Baseline by 𝐾× 𝑁lost ticks,
reaching ≈100𝑚𝑠over the 10𝑠run.
Plant 2 controls motor angular position (𝜃) using state 𝑥=
[𝜃,𝜔]⊤with model feed-forward plus Proportional-Derivative (PD)
feedback, tracking 𝜃ref(𝑡) = 2.735 sin(2𝜋· 1.871𝑡) rad. A single
Secure-world event at 𝑡= 2.2003 s, placed immediately after a
normal controller release and just before the next nominal release,
freezes Non-Secure SysTick for 𝑁patch = 190 ticks (19 ms), spanning
almost an entire control period (but not a complete one). While
Baseline and Compensated release the next control instance at

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Antonio Joia Neto, Amarin Laohajirapan, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Ivan De Oliveira Nunes
Figure 5: Plant 1: DC-motor speed control under periodic Secure-world service. The Uncompensated run accumulates monotonic
schedule drift; the Compensated run remains aligned with Baseline.
Figure 6: Plant 2: Position servo under a single 190 tick freeze. The Uncompensated run misses the next controller release,
producing a visible position deviation; the Compensated run remains aligned with Baseline.
𝑡= 2.2199 s, the Uncompensated run misses that release entirely
and resumes at 𝑡= 2.2389 s.
7.2
Results
Figures 5–6 summarize the results. In the periodic SysTick freeze
experiment (Figure 5), the cumulative drift raises speed Root Mean
Square Error (RMSE) from 6.55 to 8.02 rad s−1. Post-transient (𝑡≥
2 s), mean and peak absolute errors grow from 1.07 to 4.11 rad s−1
and from 3.47 to 12.37 rad s−1, respectively; in the late-time 12–15 s
window, speed and command deviations reach 11.69 rad s−1 and
14.72 V. In the single freeze period experiment, the single missed
release raises position RMSE from 4.78 to 8.88 mrad and produces
a peak deviation of 56.06 mrad (3.21𝑜), with velocity and command
deviations of 10.99 rad s−1 and 14.77 V. In both experiments, Com-
pensated matches Baseline exactly, confirming that tick compen-
sation fully eliminates control degradation, while uncompensated
clock drifts make the tested control systems unstable.
8
Related Work
Prior work on microcontroller timer design and RTOS timekeep-
ing demonstrates that classical tick-driven RTOSes on Cortex-M
devices are prone to time drift whenever interrupts are delayed or
masked. Since SysTick correctness depends entirely on timely inter-
rupt delivery, long non-preemptable sections or Trusted Execution
Environment (TEE) activity can violate this assumption. Analyses
of Cortex-M timing [28] show how ISR latency directly produces
scheduling jitter and missed ticks, while early trusted scheduling
systems [26, 32] emphasize that protecting timer hardware such as
SysTick is essential for maintaining a consistent time base in ad-
versarial settings. TrustZone-M hypervisors [39] further highlight
that Secure-World execution can temporarily block the Non-Secure
RTOS from receiving periodic timer events.
Complementary research in mixed-criticality and secure sched-
uling investigates how real-time and security tasks can coexist
without violating timing guarantees. Classical mixed-criticality ap-
proaches integrate security routines as slack-time or background
tasks [24] or adapt their execution periods to avoid deadline misses
[25]. More specialized TEE-based systems leverage hardware iso-
lation: FreeTEE [38] executes periodic security services in the Se-
cure World with minimal disruption to the Non-Secure scheduler,
whereas RT-TEE [45] ensures that critical secure tasks preempt un-
trusted code using TrustZone timers and a compact trusted sched-
uler.
Recent TrustZone-M systems and secure microcontroller de-
signs build on these concepts by providing stronger execution isola-
tion and well-defined rules for how interrupts are delivered across
security domains. Partitioned or asymmetric schedulers such as
Sanctuary [8] reduce interference by masking or reprioritizing in-
terrupts during secure execution, and hypervisors for embedded
TEEs [39] explicitly address the interplay between secure services
and the Non-Secure RTOS time base. Lightweight TEE frameworks
for MCUs [27, 29, 33] similarly explore how secure operations in-
teract with fixed-priority or time-partitioned scheduling, generally
converging on designs that enforce predictable interrupt behavior
while preserving real-time correctness.

Resolving Conflicts Between RTOS Timekeeping and Uninterruptable Trusted Computing
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
9
Conclusion
This work identifies and characterizes a core conflict between TEE-
based security services and real-time systems, where an RTOS
may lose track of time due to the execution of uninterruptible
security services. To address this problem, we propose a secure
synchronization scheme in which the secure domain within the
TEE compensates timekeeping inconsistencies without requiring
hardware changes or RTOS modifications. Our evaluation, based
on an open-source prototype, demonstrates the effectiveness of the
proposed time reconciliation mechanism.

Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Antonio Joia Neto, Amarin Laohajirapan, Norrathep Rattanavipanon, and Ivan De Oliveira Nunes