Adding Compilation Metadata To Binaries To Make
Disassembly Decidable
Daniel Engel, Freek Verbeek
Open University, Heerlen, The Netherlands
Email: {daniel.engel, freek.verbeek}@ou.nl
Pranav Kumar, Binoy Ravindran
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, USA
Email: {pranavkumar, binoy}@vt.edu
Abstract—The binary executable format is the standard
method for distributing and executing software. Yet, it is also
as opaque a representation of software as can be. If the binary
format were augmented with metadata that provides security-
relevant information, such as which data is intended by the
compiler to be executable instructions, or how memory regions
are expected to be bounded, that would dramatically improve the
safety and maintainability of software. In this paper, we propose
a binary format that is a middle ground between a stripped
black-box binary and open source. We provide a tool that
generates metadata capturing the compiler’s intent and inserts
it into the binary. This metadata enables lifting to a correct and
recompilable higher-level representation and makes analysis and
instrumentation more reliable. Our evaluation shows that adding
metadata does not affect runtime behavior or performance.
Compared to DWARF, our metadata is roughly 17% of its size.
We validate correctness by compiling a comprehensive set of
real-world C and C++ binaries and demonstrating that they can
be lifted, instrumented, and recompiled without altering their
behavior.
1. INTRODUCTION
The binary format (e.g., ELF but the same applies to
MACHO or PE) is the de-facto standard method of distributing
software. It also is, however, essentially a black-box. Without
source code available, it is hard to analyze a binary, to apply
patches to it, to test or to fuzz it. This is the cause of various
security issues, undetected or unpatched vulnerabilities, and
exploits. If we would distribute software in a binary format
that is analyzable, editable, instrumentable, and fuzzable, that
could dramatically impact the safety of our software. We thus
argue software should not be distributed as black-boxes. How-
ever, distributing source code is not always an option either:
third-party closed source software is ubiquitous. Enterprises
need the capability of distributing software without publish-
ing their source code or revealing proprietary internals. The
question then is: what would a middle ground binary format
look like that on one hand is “easier” to analyze and test, and
“more instrumentable”, but that on the other hand does not
require one to distribute the source, nor makes it substantially
easier to retrieve the source through decompilation?
First, let us consider this question practically with some
examples. In order to do an analysis (e.g., verify memory-
related properties or the absence of overflows), one needs
to have bounds on the sizes of memory regions, and one
needs to be able to traverse the binary, which requires control
flow graphs (CFG) of each function [4], [35], [39], [10],
[15]. In order to apply a patch, or to instrument a binary
for fuzzing, one needs to be able to insert instructions and
data into a binary [7], [14]. Currently, a stripped Executable
and Linkable Format (ELF) file does not enable any of these
actions. However, for these kinds of actions, one does not
necessarily need variable names, type information, or anything
related to the structure of the original source code.
To summarize these requirements, we argue the need
for a middle ground binary format that is 1.) traversable,
2.) memory-structured, and 3.) instrumentable. Traversability
means that given the current instruction, we have a reasonably
tight overapproximation of what the next instruction to be
executed is. This is a challenge, since in binaries the address
of the next instruction may be computed dynamically at run-
time (indirections). Memory-structured means that compound
contiguous memory segments such as stack frames (where
local data is stored) and data sections (where global data
is stored) can be decomposed into bounded independent
memory regions. Without this property, analysis tools must
treat memory segments as single undifferentiated arrays of
bytes, thwarting verification of memory-related properties.
Instrumentable means that the binary can be edited by adding
instructions and data.
Based on these requirements, we argue that a middle
ground binary format at least should provide symbolized
assembly [38], [36]. Symbolization replaces absolute addresses
and offsets with symbolic labels. If the text- and data sections
of a binary are symbolized, this enables insertion of new
instructions and data, required for patching and instrumen-
tation. Symbolization, however, is not enough. Symbolized
assembly still can be untraversable due to indirections, and
need not be memory-structured: information on which parts of
a memory segment are to be considered independent can be
lost. We will define fully symbolized assembly as symbolized
assembly with additional characteristics that ensure the above
three properties.
Retrieving fully symbolized assembly from a normal binary
requires the solving of various problems that are undecidable.
arXiv:2604.19628v1 [cs.CR] 21 Apr 2026

First of all, it requires disassembly, which in itself is already
undecidable. Subsequently, it requires at least indirection re-
solving, function boundary detection, call graph construction,
per-function termination analysis, and CFG construction just
to obtain a traversable intermediate representation (IR). Then,
recovering a structured memory model for stack frames and
data sections requires advanced forms of pointer and shape
analysis, or analysis based on probabilistics or heuristics [4],
[5], [20], [26], [44], [32]. Simply establishing which calling
convention was used during compilation of the binary already
requires a data flow analysis. All of these problems are
undecidable [31]. However, all of the answers were known
at build time.
To emphasize this point more, we state that solving the
above problems is not just theoretically undecidable, but that
in practice state-of-the-art tools also often fail [2], [16], [29],
[25]. This holds true even though a large body of both
academic literature as well as industrial tooling exists, in the
fields of binary analysis, reverse engineering, and decom-
pilation. Even today’s state-of-the-art tools will not reliably
disassemble and lift all binaries, are not capable of resolving
all indirections, and do not produce recompilable code in a
trustworthy fashion. This statement holds even when we only
consider benign binaries produced by compilers. The core
of the issue is that these tools have the impossible job of
recovering information that was known – but lost – while
building the binary.
The contribution of this paper is a binary format we call the
Executable, Linkable, and Liftable Format (ELLF). An ELLF
is an ELF, augmented with a minimum amount of metadata
that prevents the need to solve any of the above problems, or in
other words, that makes the above problems decidable. We first
discuss what exact metadata needs to be added to achieve this.
We show how this metadata can be gathered at build time and
how it can be added to an ELF without significant overhead in
terms of compilation time and binary file size. We are agnostic
of the compiler settings: one can still compile the code as one
likes (e.g., at any optimization level). We then show that the
above problems are indeed decidable by providing executable
and efficient algorithms. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first effort on generating ground truth information at
build time, packing it into a binary format, evaluating its
correctness, and demonstrating that it is sufficient for lifting
to a recompilable higher-level IR.
Currently, there are three ways to distribute an ELF:
stripped, unstripped, or augmented with DWARF debugging
information. First, note that all of these formats contain too
little information to make any of the above problems decid-
able. For example, even for unstripped ELF files with DWARF
information, recovering control flow is undecidable. Secondly,
note that unstripped ELFs – with or without DWARF de-
bugging information – also contain too much information.
They contain – among others – names of global variables
and internal functions, which is why many vendors choose
to distribute stripped binaries instead. DWARF in particular
includes a large amount of information that is irrelevant in
Stripped Binary
0x4000:
push
rbp
0x4001:
mov
rax, 0x4007
0x4004:
jmp
rax
0x4006:
sub
al, bl
0x5000:
.long
0x4003
ELF + DWARF
; <main>
0x4000:
push
rbp
0x4001:
mov
rax, 0x4007
;
= <main>+0x07
0x4004:
jmp
rax
0x4006:
sub
al, bl
0x5000:
.long 0x4003
;
= <main>+0x03
ELLF
main:
push
rbp
mov
rax, done
jmp
rax
.byte
0x2A
done:
ret
g_var:
.long 0x4003
;
not an address!
Fig. 1: Disassembly comparison.
this context and can be considered undesirable in the final
binary, such as mappings from binary locations to their original
source code locations. There is no format that is as close
as possible to a stripped ELF, but that does provide crucial
and security-relevant information on, e.g, the intended jump
targets of indirections, or on which addresses in the binary are
intended to be executable instructions and which not.
Example. Figure 1 shows a comparison of disassembling
a stripped ELF, disassembling an ELF with DWARF, and
disassembling an ELLF. When only the raw bytes of the
binary are available, it is impossible to distinguish between
instructions and raw data bytes, possibly causing disassemblers
to misinterpret them. With DWARF debugging information,
some of these problems can be alleviated as the entries of
functions are often known and values can be compared to
known pointer addresses. However, this approach is still prone
to misinterpretation as soon as text and data are mixed.
Additionally, if raw values coincide with known addresses,
these raw values can be misinterpreted to be pointers. In the
ELLF, such misinterpretation do not occur, as it contains the
exact instruction locations and marks values as either raw
values or pointers.
To summarize, the contributions of this work are:
• A study of which metadata is needed in order to
make a binary traversable, memory-structured, and in-
strumentable.

Binary
Unsymbolized
Assembly
Coarsely
Symbolized
Assembly
Stack
Symbolized
Assembly
Text
Symbolized
Assembly
Data
Symbolized
Assembly
Fully
Symbolized
Assembly
Instruction Oracle
Pointer Oracle
Text
Oracle
Stack
Oracle
Data
Oracle
Fig. 2: Overview of the lifting pipeline.
• A tool to collect said metadata at build time, pack it into
an efficient representation, and insert it as a section into
the binary, producing ELLF files.
• A lifter that consumes an ELLF file and lifts it to correct
fully symbolized assembly code.
Section 2 introduces the structure of the metadata we embed
into binaries and explains how it enables precise disassembling
and symbolization. Section 3 describes the metadata genera-
tion in more detail, including how the relevant information
is extracted from the compiler outputs, how it is encoded,
and how it is later consumed to disassemble stripped binaries.
Section 4 presents our evaluation, in which we compile the
LLVM Test Suite and embed ELLF metadata into the binaries.
After stripping the binaries, we disassemble them using only
our metadata and the binary itself. We then reassemble the
disassembled output using a standard gcc and verify that the
recompiled binaries match the behavior of the original binaries
across the available test suites. This validates not just the
completeness of the metadata but also the correctness of the
disassembly. Section 5 discusses related work in extracting
disassembling ground truth from the compiler and in lifting
binaries to a rewritable format. This paper concludes with a
discussion in Section 6.
2. ELLF METADATA
Our metadata design is informed by exploring the needs
of a lifter capable of taking a binary and producing fully
symbolized assembly. The lifter works in five steps, each
raising the level of abstraction (see Figure 2). Each step
is in itself undecidable, and therefore requires an oracle:
information that makes the step decidable. Per step, we provide
details on what the input and output is, what oracle is needed
and why the oracle is necessary to make the step decidable.
In this section, we provide an abstract view of the information
provided by the oracles, or in other words, a specification. The
concrete implementation will differ, mostly because storing
the information naively will take up a lot of space. Section 3
provides more information on the actual concrete metadata
inserted into the binary.
The first two steps have to be applied sequentially. The
steps on text-, data- and stack symbolization can be executed
independently in any order. Once all three have been achieved,
this produces fully symbolized assembly.
We use W64 to denote the set of 64-bit words. Notation
X? is used to denote the set X ∪⊥with ⊥a fresh element
representing “None”. Notation f :: X ⇀Y denotes that f is
a partial function from set X to set Y .
Step I: unsymbolized assembly. Step I takes as input raw
data and outputs disassembled instructions (see Figure 4). It is
one of the primary challenges in disassembling to determine
the exact locations of instructions, and this is well-known to
be undecidable [33], [41], [34], [40]. Although the function
boundary information available in DWARF can provide some
guidance, identifying all instruction addresses remains unde-
cidable.
The instruction oracle, abstractly seen, provides a set of
addresses that are intended by the compiler to be the starting
addresses of executable instructions. We model the instruction
oracle as follows:
InstructionOracle :: {W64}
In other words, the oracle is a set of 64-bit values.
With the instruction oracle in place, lifting to unsymbolized
disassembly becomes straightforward: a disassembler can tra-
verse all addresses provided by the oracle, disassemble the
instruction at the given address or emit the raw data if no
instruction is at that address.
Step II: coarsely symbolized assembly. Step II takes as
input unsymbolized assembly and lifts it to a representation
where all pointers to text- and data-sections are replaced with
labels (see Figure 4). The pointer oracle is modeled as:
PointerOracle :: W64 ⇀
Instr [W64?]
|
Data W64
|
W64 −W64
The pointer oracle is a partial mapping from 64-bit ad-
dresses to pointer information. If the given address a belongs
to an instruction, it provides an ordered list that gives for each
operand either ⊥(if the operand is not a pointer), or a pointer
value. In Figure 4, the lea instruction has two operands,
where the second one is a pointer. It may also be the case
that the given address a falls in some data section, and that
at the location some pointer value p is stored. In that case
PointerOracle(a) will return Data p. Finally, it may be

the case that address a falls in some data section and at that
location the difference between two pointers is stored. This
typically happens when compilers implement jump tables.
Retrieving this oracle from a binary is again undecidable. If
the binary is not RIP-relative, it is undecidable to determine
whether, e.g., the value occurring in the instruction mov
rax, 0x4000 is a pointer or not. In case the binary is RIP-
relative, this problem does not occur. However, even then the
cases where the origin of a value is the difference between
two pointers are undecidable.
With this oracle in place, symbolization of pointers becomes
straightforward. A disassembler can traverse all instruction
operands and replace them by a symbolic name if they are
pointers, and traverse the data sections in similar fashion as
well.
This lifting step produces coarsely symbolized assembly:
one can move entire sections to other addresses, but within a
section instructions and data are still fixed to their locations.
As a result, one can already insert new text- or data sections.
To actually intersperse new instructions within an existing text
section, requires more fine-grained symbolization.
Step III: text symbolized assembly. Step III takes as
input coarsely symbolized assembly and produces assembly
where the text sections have been symbolized in a fine-grained
fashion (see Figure 4). This step essentially introduces basic
blocks into the code: blocks of instructions that are always
executed sequentially. The oracle is modeled as:
TextOracle :: W64 ⇀FunctionStart | FunctionEnd | BB
If TextOracle(a) is FunctionStart, then address a is a
function entry, i.e., the address of the first instruction of some
function. FunctionEnd means at address a is last instruction
of a basic block that ends the function. This instruction thus
can be a return statement, can halt the program, or can call
some function that exits the program or does not return. BB
means that the address is the starting address of some basic
block that is not the start or end of a function. Again, deriving
this oracle from a binary is undecidable, in this case because
it requires at least resolving of indirections and termination
analysis.
Having fine-grained symbolized text sections ensures that
1.) the function boundary (i.e., entry and exit points) of each
function in the binary is known, and 2.) the CFG of each
function is known. Both are crucial in enabling instrumentabil-
ity and traversability of the binary. At this stage, one can
intersperse new instructions (e.g., emit a logging message or
insert a null-pointer check).
Step IV: stack symbolized assembly. The stack frames
of functions can be symbolized in fine-grained fashion as
well. A stack frame is a contiguous memory segment used
for storing local objects such as variables, arrays and structs.
Up to this step, there is no information available on how the
stack frame is structured, i.e., how the contiguous memory
can be broken down into objects. It is a notoriously hard and
undecidable problem to recover structure of stack frames from
a binary [32].
The stack oracle is modeled as:
StackOracle :: W64 →{W64}
When some function f is called with entry address a, the stack
pointer will have some initial value rsp0. The stack frame
then stores local data at various offsets (see Figure 3). For
this example, the oracle will return the set {4, 32, 40}.
rsp0
rsp0 −4
rsp0 −32
rsp0 −40
Variable
Array
Variable
Fig. 3: Example of stack frame structure.
Having fine-grained symbolized stack frames provides anal-
ysis tools with information necessary to do their work. By
inserting the stack frame structure into the binary, one can,
e.g., shuffle the objects on the stack. This is a form of binary
diversification [9], [8], a practical technique to prevent bugs
from being exploitable. One can also take a binary with
shuffled stack frames and fuzz it, to see if any behavior
changes with respect to the original. If so, that would indicate
some out-of-bounds access, or at the least some violation
of how the stackframe was intended to be structured by the
compiler. Such violations are well-known to be the source
of vulnerabilities. Finally, static analysis tools can do bounds
checking, but this requires them to know the bounds of local
arrays. That is exactly the information provided by this oracle.
Step V: data symbolized assembly. In similar fashion
to achieving fine-grained stack symbolization, the data sec-
tions can be symbolized in fine-grained fashion as well (see
Figure 4). The data oracle provides this information, and is
modeled as follows:
DataOracle :: W64 ⇀N+
It
maps
addresses
to
positive
integers.
If,
e.g.,
DataOracle(a) returns 80, then the 80-byte region at
address a is intended by the compiler to be an independent
object. Thus, after fine-grained data symbolization, one
should be able to move and shuffle global objects around
in memory without changing the intended behavior of the
binary, in similar fashion to stack symbolization.
3. ELLF GENERATION
All the information that is needed to generate the ora-
cles is available at some time during building, some of the
information is preserved in the resulting ELF/DWARF file.
We require the compiler to output some extra information
that is not generated by default. We modify the compiler
arguments to include -g to always generate DWARF infor-
mation, -fbasic-block-address-map to emit informa-
tion about the basic blocks in the binary, --emit-jump
-table-sizes-section to detect which pointers belong
to the same jump table, and the linker arguments to include
-Wl,-Map=<name>.map for a mapping from the original
object files to their locations inside the binary. The debugging

0x4000:
55 48 89 E5 48 8D 0D 20 00 00 00 48
63 14 A9 48 01 CA FF E2 48 31 C0 E9
00 00 00 00 48 C7 C0 2A 00 00 00 C3
F0 FF FF FF FF FF FF FF F8 FF FF FF
FF FF FF FF
0x4000: push
rbp
0x4001: mov
rbp, rsp
0x4004: lea
rcx, [rip + 0x20]
0x400B: movsxd rdx, [rcx + rbp * 4]
0x400F: add
rdx, rcx
0x4012: jmp
rdx
0x4014: xor
rax, rax
0x4017: jmp
0x4023
0x401C: mov
rax, 42
0x4023: ret
0x4024: F0 FF FF FF FF FF FF FF
F8 FF FF FF FF FF FF FF
text+00: push
rbp
text+01: mov
rbp, rsp
text+04: lea
rcx, [data+00]
text+0B: movsxd rdx, [rcx + rbp * 4]
text+0F: add
rdx, rcx
text+12: jmp
rdx
text+14: xor
rax, rax
text+17: jmp
text+23
text+1C: mov
rax, 42
text+23: ret
data+00: .quad (text+14) - (data+00)
data+08: .quad (text+1C) - (data+00)
BB0: push
rbp
mov
rbp, rsp
lea
rcx, [D0]
movsxd rdx, [rcx + rbp * 4]
add
rdx, rcx
jmp
rdx
BB1: xor
rax, rax
jmp
BB3
BB2: mov
rax, 42
BB3: ret
D0: BB1 - D0
D1: BB2 - D0
1⃝Instruction Oracle
{0x4000, 0x4001, . . .}
2⃝Pointer Oracle
0x4004 7→[⊥, 0x4024]
0x4024 7→0x4014 −0x4024
0x402C 7→0x401C −0x4024
3⃝Text Oracle
0x4000 7→FunctionStart
0x4014 7→BB
0x4023 7→FunctionEnd
4⃝Data Oracle
0x4004 7→8
0x4012 7→8
1⃝
2⃝
3⃝, 4⃝
Fig. 4: Example of lifting, with examples of the data provided
by the oracles.
information is discarded after metadata generation as it is not
needed in the final binary or for disassembling. Additionally,
we add symbols to the start of every section and store
relocations to these symbols to improve the reliability of the
linker map.
Table I contains the sources for the metadata for each
step from Section 2. Each source is annotated by the stage
in which it is available: Can we get the information in
a standard ELF file (ELF), only binaries with debugging
information (DWARF) or is the information only available
during compiling and linking (CC/LD)?
Disassembling. For basic disassembling, we need to know
the addresses of all instructions in the binary. This is infor-
mation that is not available by default during any stage of
compilation. Clang supports an option to emit information
about the basic blocks in the binary. Inside a basic block,
all bytes must be instructions since there are no jumps to skip
over some bytes. Conversely, every byte that does not fall
within any basic block must be padding or data. From this
information, we generate the InstructionOracle. Storing
the address of every instruction in the metadata would be very
expensive. Instead, we compress this information into instruc-
tion regions that contain the address of the first instruction
and the number of uninterrupted, sequential instruction. This
information is more coarse than the basic block information,
multiple basic blocks can be collapsed into a single instruction
region. Additional metadata that is necessary to recompile the
binary, such as the dynamic libraries required, is available in
the standard ELF headers and does not need to be included in
the metadata.
Coarse Symbolization. For the coarse symbolization, we
need to know which operands in instructions and which bytes
in the .data sections are pointers to other locations, and
which are pure data. In a position independent binary, resolv-
ing which instructions contain pointers to symbols is trivial
as they do not use absolute addresses. In position dependent
binaries, this information is accessible through relocations.
After compilation, the final addresses of functions and other
objects are not known. Instead, the instructions and variables
accessing this information are filled with zero bytes to be filled
in during linking. Relocations are added as hints for the linker
to know which zero bytes need to be replaced by the addresses
of objects. After linking, the relocations are often no longer
needed and discarded.
Clang supports the --emit-relocs flags to keep relo-
cations from being discarded. However, there have been bugs
in lld where relocations got lost even if this flag is passed.
For this reason, we collect this information directly from the
object files, where the relocations are necessarily present and
map their addresses into the binary using the linker map file.
If a datum is a pointer according to this metadata then its
original type in C/C++ must have been a pointer as well, or
it was the target of a function call or control flow jump. But
not every C/C++ pointer is also in the pointer oracle. The
value of variable like volatile int *dst = 0x6000
is a pointer but it must not be symbolized during the coarse
symbolization step.
Text Symbolization. For the text symbolization, we need
to add a label to all instructions that are intended as jump
targets. The only instructions that the compiler intends as
jump targets are the first instructions of basic blocks. This
information is read directly from LLVM’s basic block address
map. Additionally, to generate correct assembly code during

Purpose
Information
Present In
Location
ELF
DWARF
CC/LD
Disassembling
Instruction Addresses
✓
.llvm_bb_addr_map
_start Symbol Address
✓✓
ELF Header
Required Dynamic Libraries
✓✓
.dynamic, .dynstr
Coarse Symbolization
Pointer-To-Text Operands
✓✓1
✓
.text, .rel.*, .rela.*
Pointer-To-Data Operands
✓✓1
✓
.text, .rel.*, .rela.*
Pointer-To-Text Variables
△
✓
.debug_info, .rel.*, .rela.*
Pointer-To-Data Variables
△
✓
.debug_info, .rel.*, .rela.*
Text Symbolization
Internal Function Addresses
✓
.symtab
Statically Linked Function Addresses2
✓
.symtab
Dynamically Linked Function Addresses
✓✓
.rel.*, .rela.*, .plt, .dynsym, .dynstr
Internal Label Addresses
✓✓1
✓
.text, .llvm_bb_addr_map
Jump Table Information
△
✓
.rel.*, .rela.*, .llvm_jump_table_sizes
Stack Symbolization
Local Variable Locations
✓
.debug_info
Local Variable Types3
✓
.debug_info
Data Symbolization
Global Variable Addresses
△
△
✓
.debug_info, .rel.*, .rela.*
Global Constant Addresses
△
△
✓
.debug_info, .rel.*, .rela.*, .symtab
String Addresses
△
✓
.debug_info, .symtab
Global Variable Types3
✓
.debug_info
Exception Support
CFI Directives
✓
.eh_frame
Language Specific Data Areas
△
△
.eh_frame, .llvm_bb_addr_map
1: In position dependent binaries, this information is not known.
2: Due to inlining, this information does not always apply.
3: Only the sizes of the types are needed.
TABLE I: Sources of disassembling and symbolization information in ELF/DWARF binaries. The columns ELF, DWARF,
CC/LD indicate if the information is collected via the final ELF binary, the debugging information in the final ELF binary
or during the compilation and linking phase. Symbols: ✓= available, ✓✓= available even after striping, △= partially
available.
recompilation, we need to know which instruction start and
end functions. The start of functions are known via the symbol
table in standard ELF but are more reliably known using the
basic block address map. For the text metadata, we only store
the addresses where basic blocks start and a marker for the
basic block that starts a function. All other information is
deduced from there.
Data Symbolization. For the data symbolization, we need
to add a label to all global variables. This information is
not available in ELF, but debugging symbols in DWARF
contain debugging information entries for global variables and
their types. Unlike the text symbolization, it is not enough
to know the starting address of global variables to generate
valid assembly code for it. Binaries reuse strings in order
to reduce their memory footprint, for example, if a program
uses the strings “Hello World” and “World”, the binary
will only store the former and access the latter via an offset.
Still, DWARF sees these as conceptually distinct variables and
contains incorrect information. To combat this, we do not keep
variables that would overlap with previous ones. If DWARF
misses a variable, our data oracle becomes slightly less precise
but remains sound. The data that should belong to a missed
variable is merged with the variable directly preceding it.
Stack Symbolization. For the stack symbolization, we need
to add a label to all local variables. This is done in similar
fashion to the data symbolization. The main difference is that
local variables belong to a function and are not available
everywhere in the binary. As such, the metadata for stack
symbolization cannot contain purely the addresses of local
variables, it needs to pair them with the address of the function
containing the local variables.
Exception Support. C++ binaries may define, throw and
catch exceptions. On the binary level, this is implemented
via DWARF Call Frame Information (CFI) entries in the
.eh_frame and the Language Specific Data Area (LSDA)
in the .gcc_except_table. On the assembly level, the
CFI entries are represented as directives and interspersed with
normal instructions. These can be directly reconstructed from
the .eh_frame. The LSDA needs to be symbolized and