Large Language Models as Explainable Cyberattack Detectors for
Energy Industrial Control Systems
Weiyi Kong
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
terry.kong@mail.utoronto.ca
Ahmad Mohammad Saber
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
a.abdelsamie@mail.utoronto.ca
Amr Youssef
Concordia Institute for Information Systems Engineering
Concordia University
Montreal, Canada
youssef@ciise.concordia.ca
Deepa Kundur
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada
dkundur@ece.utoronto.ca
Abstract
In modern energy systems, industrial control systems (ICS) and
power-system SCADA require intrusion detection that is not
only accurate but also auditable by operators. The ICS intrusion-
detection landscape is currently dominated by established super-
vised detectors. In this paper, we study whether an off-the-shelf
large language model (LLM) can serve as a complementary, human-
in-the-loop layer for Modbus traffic. We cast this as a binary
network-side normal/critical decision task on two public ICS Mod-
bus datasets, collapsing attack periods and other safety-critical
behaviors into a single critical class. Each Modbus communication
instance is converted into a compact token string derived from
discretized protocol fields, and a prompt-configured LLM produces
a normal/critical alert together with a concise, token-grounded
incident record for analyst review. Under matched event informa-
tion and shared evaluation splits, the resulting LLM-based triage
pipeline achieves high predictive performance on both bench-
marks and is broadly comparable to strong supervised baselines,
while requiring no task-specific weight updates. To assess the
audit record, we apply intervention-based diagnostics, including
sufficiency- and necessity-style tests, which provide evidence that
the cited tokens are often decision-relevant to the model’s own
prediction. These records are intended as audit signals rather than
full human-grounded explanations.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy →Intrusion detection systems; • Hardware
→Smart grid; • Applied computing →Command and control;
• Computing methodologies →Machine learning.
Keywords
industrial control systems, Modbus, intrusion detection, explainable
artificial intelligence (xAI), large language models
Accepted to ACM EnergySP 2026, co-located with ACM e-Energy 2026. This is
the authors’ accepted manuscript. The final published version will appear in
the ACM Digital Library.
1
Introduction
Industrial control systems (ICS) in modern power grids rely on
SCADA protocols such as Modbus to exchange measurements and
commands. These systems are vulnerable to cyberattacks including
false-data injection (FDIA) [10], and utilities need intrusion detec-
tion that is not only accurate but also auditable, so that alarms can
be understood, trusted, and archived for incident response.
The ICS intrusion-detection literature is extensive, with super-
vised pipelines spanning a wide range of learners and Modbus-
specific protocol models [6, 13]. Supervised machine-learning
detectors—from gradient-boosted trees to deep neural networks—
already achieve strong accuracy on public ICS benchmarks [6,
13]. Explainability approaches range from intrinsically inter-
pretable detectors to post-hoc feature-attribution methods such as
SHAP/LIME [5, 7, 12]. In parallel, LLMs are increasingly explored
for cybersecurity tasks including log triage and vulnerability anal-
ysis [15], though most work uses the model as an assistant over
natural-language reports rather than as a classifier over industrial
protocol tokens. Across these lines of work, a deployment-oriented
gap remains. High-accuracy supervised detectors achieve strong
predictive performance but, in many practical deployments, still
involve site-specific labeled data collection, feature engineering, cal-
ibration, or retraining. Existing explainability methods can require
model-specific diagnostics and do not always yield rationales in a
form directly archivable as operator-facing incident records. And
current LLM-for-security research has not systematically evaluated
the LLM as a classifier over discretized ICS protocol tokens under
matched inputs and controlled baselines.
This paper addresses this gap by studying an off-the-shelf LLM
as a triage interface over a compact Modbus token string. We do
not seek to replace established supervised approaches, nor do we
position the LLM as an autonomous final decision-maker. Instead,
we study whether a general-purpose, off-the-shelf LLM, driven
only by a compact text prompt encoding generic Modbus semantics
and ICS safety cues, can serve as a human-in-the-loop triage layer:
flagging Modbus traffic as normal or critical so that operators can
prioritize investigation, while the model simultaneously emits a
concise, archivable incident record for each alert. We formulate
this as a binary normal/critical task on two public datasets—the
arXiv:2604.26079v1 [cs.CR] 28 Apr 2026

e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
Weiyi Kong, Ahmad Mohammad Saber, Amr Youssef, and Deepa Kundur
LeMay CSET’16 Modbus dataset [8] and CIC Modbus 2023 [2]—by
collapsing all attack periods and safety-critical behaviors into a
single critical class. This scope is deliberate: operators often need
a conservative gate that surfaces traffic warranting review, while
multi-class attack attribution remains the responsibility of down-
stream analysis by human analysts, specialized classifiers, or both.
On the data-efficiency side, the LLM requires no task-specific weight
updates, and its behavior is configured through a prompt with a
small number of prototypical examples (few-shot); we show that
this prompt-only approach achieves detection performance broadly
comparable to supervised baselines trained on the full task-specific
training split. On the auditability side, a second-pass auditor pro-
duces a structured record containing verbatim evidence tokens,
risk-category tags, and an optional counterfactual edit. We evalu-
ate this record using intervention-based diagnostics—sufficiency,
necessity, and counterfactual probes—that test whether cited to-
kens are decision-relevant to the classifier [4, 14]. We note that this
constitutes a token-grounded decision-relevance audit, not a fully
human-grounded explanation; improving interpretability through
domain-expert evaluation is an important direction for future work.
Our contributions are threefold. First, we evaluate the feasibility
of a prompt-configured, few-shot LLM as a complementary triage
layer for ICS Modbus intrusion detection on two public datasets,
showing competitive performance with supervised baselines with-
out any task-specific weight updates. Second, we design a two-
pass pipeline separating prediction from explanation, producing
a structured, operator-facing incident record grounded in verba-
tim protocol tokens. Third, we assess explanation quality using
intervention-based diagnostics, providing quantitative evidence
that cited tokens are decision-relevant. Across both benchmarks,
the LLM attains approximately 0.98 accuracy with high recall on the
critical class; the practical value lies in the combination of competi-
tive detection, prompt-only deployment, and an auditable record
suitable for alerting under human review. Section 3 presents the
methodology; Section 4 describes datasets and evaluation; Section 5
reports results; and Section 7 concludes the paper.
2
Threat Model and Deployment Scope
We consider a network-side adversary who can inject, replay, mod-
ify, or flood Modbus traffic, as well as send anomalous read/write
requests. Real-world grid incidents have shown that such intrusions
into power-system operations can have substantial operational con-
sequences [3]. Our objective is therefore not full attack attribution
or autonomous response, but conservative triage: identifying traffic
that should be surfaced for prompt human review. The proposed sys-
tem is deployed as a passive decision-support layer over observed
Modbus messages. It does not issue control commands, block traf-
fic, or replace downstream forensic analysis. In this setting, false
negatives may delay detection of malicious or safety-critical traf-
fic, whereas false positives primarily increase analyst workload
and alert fatigue. Privacy and data-governance considerations in
API-based deployment are important but outside the scope of this
offline evaluation on public datasets.
Figure 1: Overview of the proposed framework. Offline prepa-
ration converts Modbus/TCP traces from LeMay and CIC into
a unified token-string representation (no model training).
Online inference uses a prompt-guided LLM to output a bi-
nary label (normal/critical), followed by an auditing step that
generates supporting evidence tokens, risk tags, and optional
what-if edits.
3
LLM-Based Detection and Auditing
Methodology
3.1
Overview
An overview of the proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. We
study intrusion detection on Modbus network traffic as a binary
normal-versus-critical task using two public traces (LeMay and
CIC). A shared ingestion pipeline normalizes timestamps and ex-
tracts discretized protocol and timing evidence, and all methods use
the same canonical train/validation/test split. For the LLM-based
approach, it is guided by a text prompt that encodes generic Modbus
semantics and high-level ICS safety cues to output a normal/critical
decision together with a short, operator-readable record. Prediction
and explanation are computed in two passes: the first pass outputs
the binary label, and the second pass asks the model to produce a
brief explanation by copying a few key tokens and, when possible,
suggesting a minimal “what-if” change to the tokens that would
change the decision. Evaluation follows a unified protocol across
methods, reporting accuracy, macro-F1 (unweighted average of
per-class F1 scores), and recall/F1 on the critical class on the shared
held-out test split.
3.2
LLM and Problem setup
We instantiate the proposed pipeline with GPT-4o [11], used here as
an off-the-shelf general-purpose LLM accessed via API in text-only
mode. No task-specific fine-tuning, weight updates, or domain-
specific retraining are performed; instead, all task behavior is spec-
ified through prompting, including a small number of in-context
exemplars. We use temperature-0 decoding to reduce output vari-
ability across repeated calls.
Given a compact text sequence 𝑥representing a Modbus frame,
the goal is to predict a binary label 𝑦∈{normal, critical} and to
produce an auditable explanation tied to the input. Here we use
“critical” as a unified positive class: for each dataset, all traffic that
occurs during any attack scenario or other safety-critical behavior

Large Language Models as Explainable Cyberattack Detectors for Energy Industrial Control Systems
e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
Figure 2: Example of raw-to-token encoding. A raw Mod-
bus/TCP packet is parsed and selected fields are discretized
into buckets (e.g., payload length 14 bytes →B2, inter-arrival
time 87 ms →B4) to form the compact token string used by
the classifier. The IP addresses shown are illustrative; the
encoding retains only traffic direction (DIR) rather than raw
addresses.
marked in the original logs is labeled critical, and all remaining
traffic is labeled normal (see Section 4 for per-dataset details). We
use an off-the-shelf LLM without modifying its parameters; every-
thing that differs between datasets is encoded in a compact domain
prompt configuration that describes generic Modbus behavior and
ICS safety cues. We refer to this collection of prompt text and cues
as the prompt configuration, denoted by 𝜋. The resulting classifier
is written as
𝑓(𝑥; 𝜋) =   ˆ𝑦(𝑥), 𝑠(𝑥)
(1)
Here 𝑠(𝑥) ∈[0, 1] is an auxiliary score recorded for analysis. For
the LLM-based classifier, ˆ𝑦(𝑥) ∈{normal, critical} is taken directly
from the model’s discrete output, and 𝑠(𝑥) is the confidence value
reported in the JSON response. We do not calibrate this confidence
and do not use it to choose the label; it is stored only for later
analysis of explanation behavior.
For supervised baselines that output a scalar score 𝑠base(𝑥) for
the critical class (for example, the sigmoid probability in logistic
regression), the predicted label is obtained by thresholding this
score. We sweep thresholds 𝜏∈[0, 1] on the validation split and
choose a threshold 𝜏base that maximizes validation macro-F1. This
threshold is then fixed and used on the test split, giving the decision
rule
ˆ𝑦base(𝑥) =
(
critical,
𝑠base(𝑥) ≥𝜏base,
normal,
𝑠base(𝑥) < 𝜏base.
(2)
For all models, once the binary decision ˆ𝑦(𝑥) is fixed at time 𝑇= 0,
it is treated as fixed; the subsequent auditing step only explains this
decision and never changes it.
3.3
Input representation
Each Modbus frame is mapped to a short token string that records
only a few protocol and timing features that we later expose to
the LLM. We encode the direction (client-to-server or server-to-
client), function code, a unit-identifier bucket, a payload-length
bucket, an inter-arrival-time bucket, and a small exception flag.
Continuous quantities such as payload length and inter-arrival time
are discretized into a small number of buckets using boundaries
fitted on the training split and reused unchanged on validation
and test to avoid leakage. For example, a typical Modbus frame is
encoded as
DIR:C2S FC:03 UNIT:U1 LEN:B2 IAT:B4 EX:0
meaning a client-to-server Modbus request with function code 3
to unit 1, with a medium-length payload, arriving after a relatively
long silence and with no Modbus exception. The same token schema
(field names and bucket identifiers) is used for both the LeMay and
CIC datasets. The only dataset-specific changes occur in the do-
main prompt configuration that highlights generic safety cues (e.g.,
certain function codes, exception flags, or timing buckets) as poten-
tially higher risk; model parameters and decoding settings (fixed
temperature, top-p, and seed) are kept identical across datasets.
This simple textual representation keeps each sample short enough
for the LLM context window while allowing the auditor to quote
individual tokens verbatim as evidence in the explanation record.
An example of raw-to-token encoding is depicted in Fig. 2.
3.4
Prompt-Configured Classifier
Modern instruction-following LLMs can perform a wide range of
classification and reasoning tasks from natural-language instruc-
tions and a few examples [1, 9]. In our setting, the Modbus classi-
fier in (1) is instantiated by a fixed LLM together with a compact,
domain-specific prompt configuration 𝜋cls. Given the token string
𝑥and 𝜋cls, the prompted language model defines a score for each
label 𝑦∈{normal, critical}, and we predict
ˆ𝑦(𝑥) =
arg max
𝑦∈{normal,critical}
𝐹(𝑥,𝑦; 𝜋cls),
(3)
where 𝐹is determined by the fixed LLM and the classifier prompt
configuration. The configuration 𝜋cls consists of: (i) a system mes-
sage describing the role of an OT security analyst, (ii) an explana-
tion of the token schema (DIR, FC, UNIT, LEN, IAT, EX), and (iii)
a small set of prototypical normal and critical examples together
with high-level ICS safety principles. The prompt asks the model
to reason about Modbus function-code semantics, direction and
timing patterns, and their potential physical impact, and to compare
the current token pattern to the prototypes in terms of how many
small token edits would be required to match them. This “prototype
and edit-distance” style guidance is encoded entirely in natural lan-
guage and does not rely on any learned parameters beyond the base
LLM. At implementation time, 𝑓cls(𝑥; 𝜋cls) is realized as a single call
to the LLM that is required to return a top-level JSON object of the
form:
{ "label": "<string>",
"confidence": <number>,
"rationale": "<string>" }
The field "label" is constrained to either "normal" or "critical".
The field "confidence" serializes 𝑠(𝑥) and is treated as an un-
calibrated score recorded for audits; it is not calibrated or re-
thresholded when choosing the label. The "rationale" field is a
short, one-sentence natural-language justification that is stored
for operator inspection but does not affect the classifier’s decision.
Deterministic decoding (fixed temperature, top-𝑝and seed) ensures

e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
Weiyi Kong, Ahmad Mohammad Saber, Amr Youssef, and Deepa Kundur
that identical inputs yield identical classifier outputs, and operating
thresholds selected on the validation set are frozen for the test set.
The classifier prompt encodes a safety-first decision policy: to-
kens that indicate generic protocol anomalies (e.g., exception flags,
rare function codes, or unusually short or long inter-arrival times)
bias the model toward the critical label, while tokens that reflect
routine background traffic (keep-alive exchanges, typical request–
response pairs) support the normal label but are not intended to
overturn clearly suspicious activity on their own. These safety cues
refer only to generic token types (such as function-code ranges and
timing buckets) rather than packet-specific signatures or dataset
identifiers.
The structured explanation record used in our audits—evidence
spans 𝐸(𝑥), risk tags 𝑅(𝑥), and a counterfactual edit 𝑐(𝑥)—is not
produced by this first pass. Instead, it is constructed in a separate
second pass by an auditor 𝑔that receives 𝑥together with the fixed
decision ˆ𝑦(𝑥). The classifier and auditor thus share the same un-
derlying model but use different prompts, and the auditor is not
permitted to change the classifier’s label.
3.5
Auditor Design and Evidence Constraints
In the second pass, given the token string 𝑥and the fixed binary
decision ˆ𝑦(𝑥), we call an auditor 𝑔that constructs a structured
explanation record while keeping ˆ𝑦(𝑥) unchanged. The auditor
shares the same underlying LLM as the classifier but uses a separate
prompt configuration 𝜋xai and is not permitted to change the label.
Given ˆ𝑦(𝑥), the auditor produces
𝑔(𝑥, ˆ𝑦) =  𝐸(𝑥), 𝑅(𝑥), 𝑐(𝑥).
(4)
The evidence list 𝐸(𝑥) = {𝑒1, . . . ,𝑒𝑚} contains short substrings
copied verbatim from the input 𝑥in their original order. The tag
set 𝑅(𝑥) summarizes which risk categories support the decision (for
example, function-code, timing-related, or exception-related cues)
without exposing implementation tables. The counterfactual 𝑐(𝑥)
is a single “what-if” token edit written as TOKEN_a →TOKEN_b
that references an existing token in 𝑥and is intended to flip the
label if applied. The auditor never alters ˆ𝑦(𝑥); its role is to justify
the decision and to propose a minimal diagnostic edit.
Faithfulness is established by intervention on the classifier, not
by description alone: we test sufficiency by preserving only the cited
evidence tokens and necessity by removing these tokens and keep-
ing the rest. Because 𝑠(·) is an uncalibrated confidence score, Δ𝑠is
treated as a directional diagnostic rather than a calibrated probabil-
ity shift; strict label flips remain primary, with pass-rate–versus–𝜀
curves and signed confidence deltas (per class) reported for com-
pleteness.
Sufficiency. Construct a minimal input 𝑥𝐸that concatenates only
the cited evidence in order and rescore with the same classifier:
  ˆ𝑦keep, 𝑠keep
 = 𝑓cls(𝑥𝐸; 𝜋cls).
(5)
Sufficiency passes if ˆ𝑦keep = ˆ𝑦(𝑥) and 𝑠keep ≥𝑠(𝑥) −𝜀, with a
nonnegative tolerance 𝜀controlling allowable confidence decrease.
Necessity. Remove all cited evidence to form 𝑥\𝐸and rescore:
  ˆ𝑦drop, 𝑠drop
 = 𝑓cls(𝑥\𝐸; 𝜋cls).
(6)
We report the flip indicator 1{ ˆ𝑦drop ≠ˆ𝑦(𝑥)} and the decrease Δ−=
𝑠(𝑥) −𝑠drop with Δ−≥0; larger values indicate greater weakening.
At tolerance 𝜀, a case passes if ˆ𝑦drop ≠ˆ𝑦(𝑥) or Δ−≥𝜀.
Counterfactual efficacy. Apply the single edit 𝑐(𝑥) to obtain 𝑥′
and rescore:
  ˆ𝑦cf, 𝑠cf
 = 𝑓cls(𝑥′; 𝜋cls).
(7)
We measure label flips 1[ ˆ𝑦cf ≠ˆ𝑦(𝑥)] and directional change 𝑠cf −
𝑠(𝑥) toward the requested label. Counterfactuals are used as a diag-
nostic of boundary sensitivity rather than a primary optimization
objective. When needed, an independent checker can be used to
validate flips externally.
3.6
Baselines
All baselines are evaluated on the same held-out test set as the LLM.
To ensure input parity, the DistilBERT baseline consumes exactly
the same compact token string representation as the LLM classifier,
with only minimal sanitation in the loader. The remaining super-
vised baselines operate on a numeric view deterministically parsed
from the same ingestion pipeline, using protocol-aware features
derived from function code, length bin, inter-arrival-time bin, excep-
tion code, and direction. No external signals beyond what the LLM
sees are introduced. The model family covers logistic regression,
gradient-boosted trees, Kolmogorov–Arnold Networks, and a com-
pact transformer encoder (DistilBERT). For the tabular learners we
apply standardization where appropriate and enable class balancing;
where supported, we employ validation-based early stopping and
restore the best checkpoint. For the transformer we augment the
tokenizer with domain tokens to avoid subword fragmentation on
protocol vocabulary and train with a class-weighted loss. We inten-
tionally avoid heavy hyper-parameter search so that comparisons
reflect representation and learner class rather than tuning budget.
To reduce leakage from near-duplicate flows, data are split using
stratification or, when identifiers permit, group-aware partitions;
the resulting train/validation/test partitions are then shared across
methods. We report accuracy and macro-F1 on the common test set
and export per-example predictions for downstream error analysis.
These choices yield reasonably strong baselines while keeping the
protocol simple and consistent with the LLM setting.
3.7
Evaluation
All methods share a fixed train, validation, and test split drawn once.
Discretization boundaries for continuous fields are estimated on the
training split and reused on validation and test. For supervised base-
lines, the threshold 𝜏is selected on the validation set to maximize
macro-F1 and then held fixed on the test set. The language model
and all baselines are evaluated on the same held-out test split (no
sub-sampling). We report accuracy, macro-F1, recall on the critical
class, and F1 on the critical class. Latency and cost are summarized
using medians and percentiles, and rare long-tail retries are treated
as outliers. Decoding is deterministic and data-processing seeds are
fixed to ensure reproducibility.
4
Experimental ICS Datasets and Preprocessing
We study network-side intrusion detection on Modbus traffic as
a binary task with the positive class labeled critical. Two public

Large Language Models as Explainable Cyberattack Detectors for Energy Industrial Control Systems
e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
Raw Data
PCAP + Attack Logs
Attack Windowing
Cluster Logs →[𝑠,𝑒]
Canonical Split
by File/Time; No Crossing
Bin Fitting (Train Only)
LEN/IAT Quantiles (Frozen)
LLM Input
Text Tokens
Numeric Baselines
Tabular Features
Figure 3: Pipeline and leakage guards. Preprocessing includes
UTC normalization, aggregation of attacker logs into contigu-
ous time windows, and a canonical train/validation/test split
that prevents temporal leakage across windows. LEN/IAT
bins are fit once on the training portion and then frozen for
validation and test, and each flow is branched into a compact
LLM token string and a numeric feature vector.
captures are used. LeMay provides labeled Modbus traces with both
normal and attack activity and is widely adopted in SCADA re-
search. CIC offers a recent Modbus capture with packet-level pcaps
and attack logs; attacks include reconnaissance, query flooding,
false-data injection, length manipulation, stacked frames, brute-
force writes, delayed responses, and replay [2, 8]. All approaches
use the same labels and a fixed train/validation/test split for fair
comparison. Fig. 3 summarizes the shared preprocessing pipeline
and the leakage-control safeguards used to ensure fair comparison
across train, validation, and test splits. Labels in CIC are derived
by aligning attack logs with packet timestamps on a common time
base (no additional timezone adjustment), forming time windows
and labeling any frame within a merged window as critical. This
yields binary labels consistent with the attack schedule while ab-
stracting away low-level choices such as the exact window gap and
tail durations. Raw records are deduplicated and time-aligned, mal-
formed entries are removed, and remaining fields are normalized to
a compact set of protocol and timing evidence sufficient for down-
stream modeling. To prevent leakage, discretization boundaries for
continuous quantities are estimated on the training split and reused
unchanged on validation and test. To make the textual and numeric
views derived from the same parse, the ingestion pipeline renders
each packet into the same compact token string that is passed to
the LLM, while, in the same pass, emitting tabular fields from the
identical parse. Function codes are rendered as FC:xx, directions
as DIR:C2S/S2C, unit identifiers as UNIT:U#, and exception codes
as EX:#. Continuous attributes are discretized on the training split
only and then frozen: payload length is mapped to LEN:B1–B4 and
inter-arrival time to IAT:B0–B4, with ties resolved toward the lower
Table 1: Test performance on the CIC dataset
Method
Accuracy
Macro-F1
Recall (critical)
F1 (critical)
LightGBM
0.9756
0.9658
0.8824
0.9341
Logistic Regression
0.9669
0.9531
0.8612
0.9207
KAN
0.9718
0.9595
0.8729
0.9288
DistilBERT
0.9739
0.9627
0.8791
0.9326
LLM (prompt-only)
0.9842
0.9829
0.9625
0.9804
bin and extreme values clipped. The numeric view reuses exactly
these fields. Parsing preserves packet order, is robust to missing
fields via explicit NA tokens, and is fully deterministic with fixed
seeds and versioned configuration, so any performance differences
arise from modeling rather than preprocessing. From the shared
ingestion pipeline we derive two coordinated views of the same
data. A compact textual view is consumed by the language-model
classifier and allows the auditor to quote short evidence spans ver-
batim from the input. A numeric view is consumed by supervised
baselines drawn from standard models. Both views originate from
the same labels and split, ensuring head-to-head comparability;
evaluation protocol details are provided in Section 3.
5
Results
Per the evaluation protocol defined in Methods, all approaches use
the shared split and a single held-out test set under identical prepro-
cessing and threshold selection. We report accuracy, macro-F1, and
recall/F1 for the critical class. Results are grouped by dataset CIC
(Table 1) and LeMay (Table 2)—to enable head-to-head comparison;
latency and cost are summarized by medians and percentiles.
5.1
Predictive performance
5.1.1
CIC Dataset. Table 1 reports CIC results. Baselines cluster
around accuracy near 0.97 with recall on the critical class near 0.88.
On the same held-out test split, the LLM attains accuracy near 0.984
with recall on the critical class near 0.963. For baselines, errors are
predominantly false negatives, consistent with the observed recall
levels. On the common test set, LLM errors are dominated by a small
number of false positives where strong risk evidence co-occurs
with otherwise benign context; false negatives are rare. Classical
baselines show the opposite tendency on a subset of borderline
cases. This complementarity suggests a practical ensemble/triage
use: prioritize LLM recall for safety and surface its flagged evidence
to operators, while numeric baselines screen out obvious benign
traffic at scale.
5.1.2
LeMay Dataset. Table 2 summarizes LeMay dataset results.
The LLM reaches high recall with accuracy around 0.98 on the
same held-out test split, while classical baselines are near-saturated
on that split. Because all methods are evaluated on the same test
set, per-cell comparisons are directly interpretable. Qualitatively,
LLM errors on this set are dominated by a small number of false
positives, consistent with a recall-leaning policy.
5.2
Explanation audits
Explanations are structurally valid and directly tied to the input
tokens. JSON well-formedness is 100% and span validity (verbatim

e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
Weiyi Kong, Ahmad Mohammad Saber, Amr Youssef, and Deepa Kundur
Table 2: Test performance on the LeMay dataset
Method
Accuracy
Macro-F1
Recall (critical)
F1 (critical)
LightGBM
0.9993
0.9993
1.0000
0.9994
Logistic Regression
0.9965
0.9964
1.0000
0.9969
KAN
0.9972
0.9971
0.9966
0.9975
DistilBERT
0.9965
0.9964
0.9950
0.9968
LLM (prompt-only)
0.9822
0.9820
1.0000
0.9838
evidence grounding) is 100%: This is a syntactic grounding check,
every evidence item is a literal substring of the corresponding token
string 𝑥. For example, if the input contains tokens such as FC:129
and IAT:B3 and the classifier assigns a critical label, the auditor is
required to copy these exact tokens into the evidence list and to
attach the corresponding risk tags (e.g., function-code and timing
rules). In our audits we do not observe cases where such designated
high-risk tokens are omitted from the explanation. When any high-
risk tokens occur, they are consistently cited in the evidence and
mirrored in the risk tags (100%). We also do not find instances where
the explanation points in the opposite direction of the label (for
example, a normal label justified only by high-risk tags). Among
critical predictions, 1.13% of cases have no cited high-risk tokens at
all; these rare “unexplained critical” items are flagged for silent retry
and monitoring. For Sufficiency, keeping only the cited evidence
tokens 𝐸(𝑥) (the tokens that the auditor copied verbatim from the
input) preserves the original decision in 95.64% of cases under a
no-decrease criterion, with score changes concentrated near zero.
By class, the mean change is +0.0018 for critical and −0.0035 for
normal, with ranges approximately [−0.01, 0.04] and [−0.05, 0],
respectively. Under stricter requirements, the pass rate is 7.72% for
Δ𝑠≥0.01 and 1.68% for Δ𝑠≥0.02. For Necessity, removing the cited
evidence tokens 𝐸(𝑥) substantially weakens decisions: the overall
flip rate is 73.15% with an average score decrease of 0.162 (quartiles
about 0.13 / 0.25 / 0.38). By class, critical flips occur in 95.27% of
cases with mean decrease 0.18, while normal flips occur in 44.19% of
cases with mean decrease 0.1395. The effect scales with the number
of cited tokens removed: the average decrease rises from about
0.084 (one token) to 0.148 (two tokens) and 0.200 (three tokens).
Following ERASER [4], we assess explanation faithfulness using
sufficiency and comprehensiveness (necessity here). Fig. 4 reports
pass rates across 𝜀with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals; the
dashed line shows the strict label-flip baseline when cited evidence
𝐸is removed. The results indicate that the cited evidence is often
close to sufficient and decision-relevant. For each audited item,
the auditor proposes a single token-level edit 𝑐(𝑥) that changes
one evidence token from the input (for example, replacing FC:129
with FC:003) toward the opposite class. We apply the edit to obtain
𝑥′ = apply(𝑥,𝑐) and recompute the decision with the same classifier
and decoding/threshold settings as in the main evaluation. Success
is defined strictly as a label flip, ˆ𝑦(𝑥′) ≠ˆ𝑦(𝑥); empty edits are
never counted and invalid edits are treated as failures. On the
same held-out test set, this strict single-edit flip rate is 23.43%.
Consistent with recent studies reporting that counterfactual self-
explanations and executable counterfactuals remain challenging for
current LLMs, our one-step probe yields limited directional gains
Figure 4: Pass-rate vs𝜀for sufficiency and comprehensiveness
(95% CIs); dashed line shows the label flipped baseline.
and only moderate flip rates; we therefore treat it as a diagnostic of
boundary sensitivity rather than a primary objective.
5.3
Runtime latency and cost
We evaluate end-to-end latency and amortized API cost of the
LLM+XAI pipeline. To mitigate occasional network spikes, latencies
are summarized after an interquartile-range (IQR) filter with Tukey
fences [0.342 s, 1.585 s]. We also report the 95th/99th percentile
(p95/p99) latency. With GPT-4o (text), the median latency is 0.91 s,
p95 is 1.35 s, and p99 is 1.51 s. Using provider list prices for GPT-4o
($2.50 per million input tokens, $10.00 per million output tokens),
the amortized cost is $0.42–$1.42 per 1k inferences depending on
the assumed prompt overhead (0–400 additional tokens per call).
6
Discussion
Our binary normal/critical formulation deliberately simplifies the
detection problem and likely makes the task easier than opera-
tional deployments. In practice, ICS monitoring often requires finer-
grained severity tiers and distinct attack categories, where class
boundaries may be substantially harder—especially when different
events share similar Modbus token patterns. Extending the present
prompt-based setup to multi-class or multi-level ICS taxonomies is
therefore an important next step, though performance would likely
fall relative to the binary results in Tables 1 and 2. More broadly, the
current pipeline relies primarily on prompt-based steering without
external grounding beyond the prompt text. Future work should
test retrieval-grounded prompting, robustness under distribution
shift and operational load, and extension to real alerting workflows
and additional ICS protocols.
7
Conclusion
We studied the feasibility of using an off-the-shelf, prompt-
configured LLM as a binary normal/critical classifier for ICS/S-
CADA Modbus traffic on two public datasets. Under a shared
evaluation protocol, the LLM achieved high detection performance
broadly comparable to strong supervised baselines trained on
matched inputs, while also producing a concise, token-grounded
audit record for each decision. Intervention-based audits further
suggest that the cited evidence tokens are often decision-relevant

Large Language Models as Explainable Cyberattack Detectors for Energy Industrial Control Systems
e-Energy ’26, June 2026, Banff, AB, Canada
to the model’s own prediction. Taken together, these results sup-
port the use of prompt-configured LLMs as a transparent triage
component for ICS monitoring under human review.