Efficient Quantum Fully Homomorphic Encryption
Fengxia Liu1, Zixian Gong∗2, Kun Tian2, Yi Zhang2, Zhiming Zheng3, and Maozhi Xu1
1Great Bay University, Dongguan 523000, China
2Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3Beihang University‌, Beijing, China
April 28, 2026
Abstract
Quantum fully homomorphic encryption (QFHE) promises secure delegated quantum
computation but has been impeded by the prohibitive quantum resource demands of exist-
ing constructions. This paper introduces a unified framework that achieves an exponential
improvement in efficiency by synergistically integrating three theoretical tools: modu-
lar arithmetic programs (MAP), the garden-hose model, and measurement-based
quantum computation (MBQC).
Our central innovation is a novel MAP tailored to the algebraic structure of Learning-
with-Errors (LWE) decryption. Unlike generic approaches that incur exponential overhead,
our MAP computes the inner product ⟨sk, c⟩mod q by tracking a partial sum modulo
q, requiring only O(log q) bits of state width.
This yields branching programs of width
O(log λ) and length O(λ log λ), thereby reducing the size of the essential quantum gadget
from O(λ2.58) to O(λ log2 λ) EPR pairs—a concrete improvement factor of 215 to 218 for
standard security parameters.
Critically, we demonstrate that LWE decryption is not a symmetric function, neces-
sitating our specialized MAP design beyond prior symmetric-function optimizations. The
framework provides a direct mapping from the MAP to an efficient gadget via the garden-hose
model, with MBQC furnishing the deterministic control flow for homomorphic evaluation.
The resulting QFHE scheme supports fully classical clients, relies solely on the classi-
cal LWE assumption (avoiding circular security or quantum hardness assumptions), and
maintains compactness. This work dramatically lowers the quantum resource barrier for
practical QFHE, paving the way for realistic privacy-preserving quantum cloud computing.
1
Introduction
The emergence of quantum computing promises to revolutionize computational capabilities
across numerous domains, from cryptography and optimization to quantum simulation and
machine learning. However, this revolutionary potential brings with it significant security chal-
lenges, particularly when users wish to leverage quantum computing resources provided by un-
trusted third parties. This fundamental tension between computational utility and data privacy
motivates one of the most profound questions in quantum cryptography: Can we compute on
encrypted quantum data without ever decrypting it?
This question lies at the heart of quantum fully homomorphic encryption (QFHE), a crypto-
graphic primitive that enables arbitrary quantum computations to be performed on encrypted
quantum states while preserving both the privacy of the input data and the correctness of the
computation.
Unlike classical homomorphic encryption, which deals with classical bits and
∗Co-first author
1
arXiv:2604.23490v1 [quant-ph] 26 Apr 2026

Boolean circuits, QFHE must contend with the unique properties of quantum information: su-
perposition, entanglement, and the no-cloning theorem. These quantum mechanical features
make the construction of efficient QFHE schemes substantially more challenging than their clas-
sical counterparts, yet also more essential for the secure deployment of quantum computing in
cloud environments.
1.1
Historical Development and Prior Work
The theoretical foundations of fully homomorphic encryption were established by Gentry [Gen09],
who constructed the first FHE scheme using ideal lattices. This breakthrough demonstrated
that arbitrary computation on encrypted data was possible, though the initial construction was
computationally expensive. Subsequent developments simplified the constructions [VDG+10]
and established security on more standard assumptions [BV11], paving the way for practical
implementations.
The quantum analogue—QFHE—extends homomorphic encryption to quantum data and
quantum computations.
This extension is significantly more challenging due to the unique
properties of quantum information. While classical FHE deals with bits and Boolean circuits,
QFHE must handle qubits, superposition states, and quantum gates that introduce complex
phase relationships.
Early QFHE Constructions.
Liang [Lia13] demonstrated the first symmetric-key QFHE
scheme, proving that information-theoretically secure evaluation of quantum circuits on en-
crypted data is theoretically possible. However, this scheme suffered from exponential overhead:
the ciphertext size grew exponentially with the circuit depth, rendering it impractical for all but
the simplest computations.
Broadbent and Jeffery [BJ15] constructed the first computationally secure QFHE schemes
using a hybrid approach combining the quantum one-time pad (QOTP) with classical FHE. Their
fundamental insight was to use the QOTP as the underlying encryption mechanism for quantum
states. The QOTP encrypts a quantum state |ψ⟩as XaZb |ψ⟩for random bits a, b ∈{0, 1},
providing information-theoretic security. The classical bits (a, b)—called the Pauli keys—are
then encrypted using classical FHE.
This hybrid approach enables homomorphic evaluation of Clifford gates (Hadamard H, Phase
S, and CNOT) by updating the encrypted Pauli keys. For example, applying a Hadamard gate
to the encrypted state transforms the encryption as follows:
HXaZb |ψ⟩= XbZaH |ψ⟩.
(1)
The server can update the encrypted keys (a, b) →(b, a) using the homomorphic properties of
the classical encryption, without learning the actual key values.
The T-Gate Challenge.
The critical limitation of Broadbent-Jeffery schemes is the T gate,
which is essential for universal quantum computation. The T gate does not commute with Pauli
operators in the same simple way as Clifford gates:
TXa = XaPaT,
(2)
where P = T2 = diag(1, i) is the phase gate. When a T gate is applied to a QOTP-encrypted
state XaZb |ϕ⟩, the result is:
TXaZb |ϕ⟩= PaXaZbT |ϕ⟩.
(3)
The server now holds a state with an extra Pa factor. To obtain a properly encrypted state,
the server needs to apply P† if and only if a = 1. However, a is encrypted under the classical
FHE scheme, so the server cannot directly determine its value.
2

Broadbent and Jeffery’s solution required interaction: the server would send the encrypted
state back to the client, who would decrypt a, apply the appropriate correction, and return
the state. This interaction requirement severely limits the practicality of the scheme for cloud
computing scenarios where the client may be offline or bandwidth-constrained.
Non-Interactive QFHE.
The breakthrough for non-interactive QFHE came with Dulek,
Schaffner, and Speelman (DSS) [DSS16], who constructed gadgets enabling the server to apply
P † conditionally on the encrypted bit a without client interaction.
The DSS construction relies on Barrington’s theorem [Bar89], which states that any function
in NC1 (logarithmic-depth Boolean circuits) can be computed by a width-5, polynomial-length
branching program. Specifically, for a circuit of depth d, Barrington’s theorem yields a branching
program of length O(4d).
The key insight is that the decryption circuit of a classical FHE scheme can be computed by
a branching program. The server prepares a quantum gadget based on this branching program.
When evaluating a T gate, the server uses the gadget to homomorphically decrypt the control
bit a and conditionally apply P †.
The Efficiency Bottleneck.
For LWE-based FHE schemes, the decryption circuit has depth
O(log λ), where λ is the security parameter. Applying Barrington’s theorem yields a branching
program of length O(4log λ) = O(λlog2 4) = O(λ2.58).
The garden-hose model [Spe15] connects branching programs to quantum resources: a width-
w, length-L branching program can be implemented using m = w · L EPR pairs. For the DSS
construction, this gives:
m = 5 · O(λ2.58) = O(λ2.58) EPR pairs.
(4)
This exponential dependence on circuit depth creates a fundamental barrier. For concrete
security parameters, the DSS scheme requires billions of EPR pairs, far exceeding the capabilities
of near-term quantum devices.
Subsequent Developments.
Several works have explored alternative approaches to QFHE.
Mahadev [Mah18] achieved classical verification of quantum computations using trapdoor claw-
free functions, enabling a classical client to verify that a quantum server performed the correct
computation. However, this scheme requires circular security assumptions and quantum LWE,
which are stronger than the classical LWE assumptions used in our work.
Gupte, Vaikuntanathan, and Wee [GVW22] developed techniques for achieving a fully clas-
sical client by outsourcing quantum state preparation to the server using dual-mode trapdoor
functions. Their approach eliminates all quantum requirements from the client while maintain-
ing security based on classical LWE. This represents a significant step toward practical QFHE
deployment. Guangsheng and Hongbo [ML22] devised a novel QFHE scheme based on quater-
nion one-time pad encryption. Compared with conventional schemes relying on Pauli one-time
pads, QOTP encryption features an expanded key space, extending the discrete finite Pauli
group to the continuous SU(2) group.
Other notable works include research on quantum homomorphic signature schemes, quantum
obfuscation, and quantum copy-protection. While these primitives are related to QFHE, they
address different security requirements and computational models.
Despite these advances, the fundamental efficiency bottleneck in QFHE—the exponential
growth of quantum gadgets with circuit depth—has remained unresolved until this work.
These results lead to the following main open problem:
Is it possible to construct a quantum homomorphic scheme that allows
evaluation of polynomial-sized quantum circuits with polynomial gadget?
3

1.2
Our Contributions
Having identified the critical efficiency bottleneck in existing QFHE schemes, we present our
unified framework that addresses these limitations through a novel synthesis of three theoretical
constructs.
Novel Modular Arithmetic Programs for LWE Decryption. Existing QFHE schemes
rely on Barrington’s theorem to convert the decryption circuit into a branching program, which
incurs exponential growth in program width with respect to circuit depth. For LWE decryption
circuits with depth O(log λ), this leads to prohibitively large gadget sizes of O(λ2.58) EPR pairs.
We introduce a modular arithmetic program (MA-Program) construction specifically designed
for the algebraic structure of LWE decryption.
LWE decryption computes ⟨sk, c⟩mod q =
n
X
i=1
ski·ci mod q, which is not a symmetric function of the secret key bits. A symmetric function
satisfies f(x1, . . . , xn) = f(xπ(1), . . . , xπ(n)) for all permutations π. However, LWE decryption
involves coefficients ci that differ across positions.
Consequently, techniques for symmetric
function evaluation, including Sinha’s O(log n) depth construction [Sin95], do not apply to LWE
decryption.
Our MA-Program construction addresses this non-symmetric structure through
sequential modular accumulation—tracking partial sums with state space Zq, requiring only
O(log q) bits of state width. This yields branching programs with width w = O(log λ) bits and
length L = O(λ · log λ), reducing the gadget size from O(λ2.58) to O(λ log2 λ) EPR pairs—an
improvement of approximately 215 to 218 for concrete security parameters.
Garden-Hose Model Integration for Quantum Computation. We develop a novel
theoretical connection between modular arithmetic programs and the garden-hose model [Spel15].
Each layer of the modular arithmetic program corresponds to a set of “pipes” (quantum states),
with transition matrices realized as connection configurations. Bell measurements implement
the connections, enabling conditional quantum operations based on encrypted control bits. This
mapping allows us to translate the logarithmic-width MA-Program directly into an efficient
quantum gadget with m = O(w · L) = O(λ log2 λ) pipes, each corresponding to one EPR pair in
the final gadget construction. Previous QFHE schemes [DSS16,DK06]]applied the garden-hose
model to Barrington-based branching programs with constant width but exponential length.
Our approach achieves both logarithmic width and polynomial length, fundamentally changing
the asymptotic behavior.
MBQC Framework with Flow Functions.
We reconstruct homomorphic evaluation
within the measurement-based quantum computation (MBQC) model [RB01,DK06].
Flow
functions provide the global control logic, specifying measurement dependencies and correc-
tion operations.
This framework naturally accommodates the conditional P † gates required
for T-gate evaluation, enabling deterministic homomorphic evaluation with adaptive measure-
ment patterns that respond dynamically to encrypted control bits.
Unlike the circuit-based
approaches of Broadbent-Jeffery [BJ15] and the direct gadget constructions of DSS [DSS16],
our MBQC-based approach provides a unified framework for both the control logic and the
quantum operations, simplifying security proofs and enabling modular analysis.
Classical Client via Dual-Mode Trapdoors.
Following Gupte et al. [GVW22], we
achieve a fully classical client by outsourcing quantum gadget preparation to the server using
dual-mode trapdoor functions. The client generates only classical gadget keys; the server deter-
ministically constructs the required quantum states. This eliminates all quantum requirements
from the client side while maintaining security. While Mahadev [Mah18] also achieves a clas-
sical client, her scheme requires circular security assumptions and quantum LWE. Our scheme
achieves a classical client based solely on classical LWE, without circular security, representing
a significant conceptual simplification.
4

1.3
Technical Overview
To provide context for our technical contributions, we review the foundations upon which our
scheme builds. The theoretical foundation for non-interactive QFHE was established through
the combination of two powerful results:
Theorem 1.1 (Barrington [Bar89). Any function f ∈NC1 (computable by depth-O(log n)
circuits) can be computed by a width-5, polynomial-length branching program. Specifically, if
f has circuit depth d, it has a width-5 BP of length O(4d).
The significance of Barrington’s theorem for QFHE is that it provides a way to evaluate
decryption circuits with bounded width. However, the exponential dependence on depth cre-
ates a fundamental limitation: for LWE decryption with circuit depth O(log λ), the branching
program length becomes O(λ2.58), leading to gadgets requiring O(λ2.58) EPR pairs.
The garden-hose model [Spel15,Chiu14] provides a complementary framework for instanta-
neous non-local quantum computation:
Definition 1.1 (Garden-Hose Complexity). The garden-hose complexity GH(f) of a function
f : {0, 1}n × {0, 1}n →{0, 1} is the minimum number of pipes m such that there exists a
protocol where: Alice (holding x) and Bob (holding y) each connect pipes according to their
inputs; Water enters at Alice’s pipe 1 iff f(x, y) = 0; Water exits at Bob’s pipe 1 iff f(x, y) = 1.
The connection between branching programs and the garden-hose model is given by:
Theorem 1.2 (Garden-Hose and Branching Programs). For any function f : {0, 1}n →{0, 1}
computable by a width-w, length-L branching program: GH(f) ≤w · L.
In contrast to the generic approach of applying Barrington’s theorem to the Boolean circuit
representation of LWE decryption, our work exploits the specific algebraic structure of modular
arithmetic. The key insight is that LWE decryption computes ⟨sk, c⟩mod q—an operation that
admits a natural sequential decomposition with state space Zq.
At a high level, our QFHE scheme operates as follows. A quantum state |ψ⟩is encrypted
using the quantum one-time pad: XaZb |ψ⟩for random bits a, b ∈{0, 1}. The pad keys (a, b) are
then encrypted using a classical leveled homomorphic encryption (LHE) scheme. Clifford gates
(Hadamard H, Phase S, CNOT) can be applied homomorphically by updating the encrypted
pad keys.
The T gate requires special handling because TXa = XaPaT, where P = T2 is
the phase gate.
When a T gate is applied to a QOTP-encrypted state XaZb |ϕ⟩, we obtain
PaXaZbT |ϕ⟩. The server must apply P† conditionally on the encrypted bit a. Our innovation
lies in constructing a quantum gadget that takes as input a quantum state and encrypted control
bit ˜a, uses m = O(w·L) EPR pairs where w = O(log λ) and L = poly(λ), applies P † to the state
if and only if fsk(˜a) = HE.Decsk(˜a) = a, and outputs the state with updated encrypted pad
keys. The gadget is constructed from a modular arithmetic program for the LHE decryption
function. Each layer of the program corresponds to a set of quantum “pipes” (half-EPR pairs).
For each layer, the server homomorphically selects one of two connection configurations based
on the encrypted input bit. Bell measurements implement the connections, and the P † gate is
embedded at the position where an accepting state would flow through.
1.4
Paper Organization
Section 2 reviews quantum computation, LWE, branching programs, and the garden-hose model.
Section 3 presents our modular arithmetic program construction and clarifies the relationship
with symmetric functions. Section 4 develops the garden-hose and MBQC framework. Section 5
presents the complete QFHE scheme with formal definitions and security proofs.
Section 6
provides concrete parameters and security analysis.
5

2
Preliminaries
We now establish the foundational concepts and notation required for our quantum fully homo-
morphic encryption scheme.
2.1
Quantum Computation and Cryptographic Primitives
We assume familiarity with basic quantum computation. A single-qubit state is represented as
|ψ⟩= α |0⟩+ β |1⟩where α, β ∈C and |α|2 + |β|2 = 1. The Pauli operators are:
I =
1
0
0
1

,
X =
0
1
1
0

,
Y =
0
−i
i
0

,
Z =
1
0
0
−1

.
(5)
The Clifford group is generated by {H, S, CNOT}, and the universal gate set is {H, T, CNOT}
where T = diag(1, eiπ/4).
A cornerstone of quantum cryptography is the quantum one-time pad, which provides
information-theoretic security for quantum states:
Lemma 2.1 (Quantum One-Time Pad [AM+00). ] For any single-qubit state ρ:
1
4
X
a,b∈{0,1}
XaZbρZbXa = I
2.
The ciphertext is perfectly secure: the encrypted state is independent of ρ.
2.2
Classical Homomorphic Encryption and LWE
Classical homomorphic encryption enables computation on encrypted data without decryption.
We formalize this concept as follows:
Definition 2.1. (Classical Homomorphic encryption scheme).(Classical Homomorphic encryp-
tion scheme). Let λ be the security parameter. A homomorphic encryption scheme HE is a
tuple of p.p.t. algorithms HE = (HE.Key Gen, HE.Enc, HE.Dec, HE.Eval) with the following
properties.
• Key Generation. The probabilistic key generation algorithm (pk, evk, sk) ←HE.KeyGen

1λ
outputs a public key pk, an evaluation evk and a secret key sk.
• Encryption. The probabilistic encryption algorithm c ←HEEncpk(x) uses the public key
pk and encrypts a single bit message x ∈{0, 1} into a ciphertext c.
• Decryption. The deterministic decryption algorithm x ←HE. Decsk(c) uses the secret key
sk and decrypts a ciphertext c to recover the message x ∈{0, 1}.
• Evaluation. The (deterministic or probabilistic) evaluation algorithm c′ ←HE. Evalevk
(C, (c1, . . . , cℓ)) uses the evaluation key evk, takes as input a circuit C : {0, 1}ℓ→{0, 1}
and sequence of ciphertexts c1, . . . , cℓ, and outputs a ciphertext c′.
We often overload the functionality of the encryption and decryption procedures by allowing
them to take in multi-bit messages as inputs, and produce a sequence of ciphertexts that corre-
spond to bit-by-bit encryptions.
Definition 2.2. (Full homomorphism and compactness). A scheme HE is fully homomorphic
if for any efficiently computable circuit C and any set of inputs x1, x2, . . . , xℓ,
Pr

HE.Decsk(c′) ̸= C(x1, . . . , xℓ)

= negl(λ).
6

This compactness property—that the output ciphertext size is independent of the compu-
tation size—is essential for practical homomorphic encryption and carries over to our quantum
construction.
The Learning With Errors (LWE) problem [Reg09] forms the foundation of our security
assumptions. The hardness of LWE against quantum attacks makes it particularly suitable for
post-quantum cryptography.
Definition 2.3 (LWE Problem). Let n be the dimension, q be the modulus, and χ be an error
distribution over Zq. The decision-LWEn,q,χ problem asks to distinguish between: (A, As + e)
where A ←Zm×n
q
, s ←Zn
q , e ←χm; (A, b) where A ←Zm×n
q
, b ←Zm
q (uniform).
The LWE assumption has been shown to be as hard as worst-case lattice problems [Reg09],
providing strong security guarantees against both classical and quantum adversaries. As we will
demonstrate in Section 3, the specific structure of LWE decryption—a modular inner product—
is ideally suited to our modular arithmetic program construction.
2.3
Branching Programs and Symmetric Functions
Branching programs provide a powerful model for computing Boolean functions with bounded
space. This model is central to our construction, as it bridges classical computation and quantum
homomorphic evaluation through the garden-hose model.
Definition 2.4. A branching program is a directed acyclic graph with a designated source node
and some number of sink nodes. Each sink node is labeled with an integer. Each non-sink
node has out-degree two and the two outgoing edges are labeled xi = 0 and xi = 1 for some
input variable xi.
In this case we say that the node reads the variable xi.
The branching
program computes a function in the following way: it is easy to see that any setting of input
bits x1, x2, . . . , xn defines a unique path from the source node to one of the sink nodes in which
all edge labelings are consistent with the assignment of x1, x2, . . . , xn; the label of this sink node
is the value of the function.
Barrington’s seminal theorem shows that all functions in NC1 can be computed by constant-
width polynomial-length branching programs. However, for specific function classes, more effi-
cient constructions exist.
Symmetric Functions and Sinha’s Construction.
A Boolean function f : {0, 1}n →{0, 1}
is symmetric if its output depends only on the Hamming weight of the input, i.e., f(x) = f(x′)
whenever
X
i
xi =
X
i
x′
i. Equivalently, f is invariant under any permutation of its input bits:
f(x1, . . . , xn) = f(xπ(1), . . . , xπ(n))
for all permutations π.
Important examples of symmetric functions include:
• Majority: MAJ(x) = 1 iff
X
i
xi ≥n/2,
• Parity: PARITY(x) =
n
M
i=1
xi,
• Threshold: THk(x) = 1 iff
X
i
xi ≥k.
Sinha [Sin95] established an optimal depth bound for computing symmetric functions with
branching programs:
7

Theorem 2.1. Any symmetric function f : {0, 1}n →{0, 1} can be computed by a branching
program of width O(log n) and length O(n).
Proof Sketch. The key insight is that a symmetric function only needs to track the Hamming
weight of the bits seen so far. The BP maintains a counter c ∈{0, 1, . . . , n} representing
X
i∈S
xi
for the processed prefix S. This counter requires O(log n) bits of state. For each input bit xi,
the counter updates as c ←c + xi. After processing all n bits, the BP accepts if f evaluates to
1 on the final count.
2.4
Sinha’s Branching Program Construction
We now provide a detailed exposition of Sinha’s branching program construction for symmetric
functions.
Formal Definition. A symmetric function f : {0, 1}n →{0, 1} can be computed by a
branching program Pf = (G, s0, sacc) where:
• G = (V, E) is a layered directed graph with L = n + 1 layers,
• Each layer ℓ∈{0, 1, . . . , n} contains w = ⌈log2(n + 1)⌉+ 1 states representing counter
values c ∈{0, 1, . . . , n},
• The start state s0 = 0 (zero count),
• The accept state set Sacc = {c : f evaluates to 1 on inputs with Hamming weight c}.
State Transition Rules. For each layer ℓ∈[n] and current counter value c ∈{0, . . . , n} :
δℓ,0(c) = c
(input bit 0 : counter unchanged)
δℓ,1(c) = c + 1
(input bit 1 : counter increments)
Counter Mechanism. The branching program operates as a sequential counter: Initialize:
c0 = 0; For each input bit xi(i = 1, . . . , n) : If xi = 0 : ci = ci−1, If xi = 1 : ci = ci−1 + 1;
Output: Accept iff cn ∈Sacc .
The efficiency of Sinha’s branching program construction stems from its optimization tailored
to the properties of symmetric functions. The output of a symmetric function depends only on
the number of ’1’s in its input (the Hamming weight), rather than the specific positions of the
’1’s. This allows the program to maintain only a counter tracking the current Hamming weight
during computation, without storing the exact bit sequence, thereby compressing the state
space (program width) to O(log n). Below are detailed descriptions of three classic symmetric
functions:
Majority Function (MAJORITY): This function outputs 1 if the number of ’1’s in the
input bits reaches or exceeds half of the total bits, and 0 otherwise. For an n-bit input, its accep-
tance setSacc is ⌈n/2⌉, ⌈n/2⌉+ 1, ..., n. In Sinha’s branching program, the program starts with a
count of 0 and increments the counter by 1 each time a ’1’ is encountered. After processing all
inputs, it accepts if the final count falls within Sacc. The efficiency of Sinha’s branching program
construction stems from its optimization tailored to the properties of symmetric functions. The
output of a symmetric function depends only on the number of ’1’s in its input (the Hamming
weight), rather than the specific positions of the ’1’s. This allows the program to maintain
only a counter tracking the current Hamming weight during computation, without storing the
exact bit sequence, thereby compressing the state space (program width) to O(log n). Below are
detailed descriptions of three classic symmetric functions:
Parity Function (PARITY): This function computes the modulo-2 sum (XOR) of the
input bits, outputting 1 when the number of ’1’s is odd and 0 when even. Its acceptance set
consists of all odd values: Sacc = {c : c ≡1(mod2)}. Notably, since only the parity of the current
8

count needs to be tracked (two states) rather than an exact count, the branching program width
implementing this function can be further optimized to w = 2, which is superior to the general
O(log n), demonstrating room for further optimization for specific symmetric functions.
Threshold Function (THRESHOLD): A generalization of the majority function, it sets
a threshold k and outputs 1 if the number of ’1’s in the input is at least k. Its acceptance set
is Sacc = {k, k + 1, ..., n}. Its branching program construction is similar to that of the majority
function, with a width of O(log n) as well.
This function family illustrates how symmetric
functions can define a rich class of functions via a simple integer threshold parameter while
remaining efficiently computable by logarithmic-width branching programs.
Why Sinha’s BP Only Works for Symmetric Functions. The fundamental limitation
of Sinha’s construction is its reliance on permutation invariance. The counter mechanism tracks
only the count of 1s, discarding all positional information. Formally:
Proposition 2.1. (Symmetry Requirement). Sinha’s O(log n)-width branching program con-
struction works if and only if the function f is symmetric.
Proof. If f can be computed by a counter-based BP that only tracks
X
i∈S
xi, then f(x) depends
only on the Hamming weight of x, making f symmetric by definition. If f is symmetric, then
f(x) = g
 X
i
xi
!
for some predicate g : {0, . . . , n} →{0, 1}. The counter-based BP computes
X
i
xi and applies g to determine acceptance.
Garden-Hose Model Mapping for Sinha’s BP. The connection to quantum computation is
established through the garden-hose model [Spe15, BFSST3]:
• Each counter value c ∈{0, . . . , n} corresponds to a ”pipe” in the garden-hose model
• The transition rules δℓ,0, δℓ,1 define how pipes are connected between layers
• Water entering at pipe 0 flows through the pipe corresponding to the final count
• The output is determined by whether the final pipe is in Sacc
• Total pipes: m = w · L = O(n log n).
This mapping enables the construction of quantum gadgets using O(n log n) EPR pairs for
symmetric function decryption. However, as we demonstrate in Section Bl, LWE decryption
is fundamentally non-symmetric, necessitating our generalized modular arithmetic program ap-
proach.
Connection to QFHE.
In the context of quantum homomorphic encryption, branching pro-
grams enable the construction of quantum gadgets through the garden-hose model [Chiu14,
Spel15]. Each state transition in the BP corresponds to a Bell measurement on EPR pairs. The
width of the BP directly determines the number of EPR pairs (quantum resources) required.
Sinha’s O(log n)-width construction for symmetric functions implies that QFHE for schemes
with symmetric-key decryption would require only O(n log n) = O(λ log λ) EPR pairs. However,
as we will show in Section 3, standard LWE-based decryption is not a symmetric function—the
coefficients ci differ across positions, breaking permutation invariance. This necessitates our
novel modular arithmetic program construction, which generalizes Sinha’s approach to handle
non-symmetric structures while maintaining logarithmic state width.
9

3
Modular Arithmetic Programs for LWE Decryption
Following the roadmap presented in Section 2, we now develop the core theoretical innovation
of this work: modular arithmetic programs (MA-Program) tailored for LWE decryption. These
programs exploit the specific algebraic structure of modular computation to achieve logarithmic
state complexity, fundamentally improving upon the exponential growth inherent in generic
branching program constructions.
We begin by formalizing the notion of a modular arithmetic program, which generalizes
standard branching programs to operate natively over modular state spaces:
Definition 3.1 (Modular Arithmetic Program). A modular arithmetic program (MA-Program)
over Zm for f : {0, 1}n →{0, 1} consists of: (1) a modulus m; (2) a sequence of instructions
⟨(iℓ, aℓ, bℓ)⟩L
ℓ=1 where iℓ∈[n] and aℓ, bℓ∈Zm; (3) initial state s0 ∈Zm; (4) accepting set
Sacc ⊆Zm. On input x, the state updates as sℓ= sℓ−1 + (1 −xiℓ)aℓ+ xiℓbℓ(mod m). The
output is 1 iff sL ∈Sacc.
This definition captures the essence of modular computation: rather than manipulating
bits directly, the program tracks a state in Zm that evolves through modular additions. The
branching behavior is determined by which of two values (aℓor bℓ) is added based on the input
bit xiℓ.
The following lemma establishes our key technical result: LWE decryption admits an efficient
MA-Program representation with logarithmic state space.
Lemma 3.1 (LWE Decryption via MA-Program). For fixed ciphertext c, the LWE decryption
function fc(sk) = HE.Decsk(c) can be computed by a modular arithmetic program over Zq with
state space Zq (represented using O(log q) bits) and program length O(n · log q).
Proof. LWE decryption computes HE.Decsk(c) =
p
q · (⟨sk, c⟩mod q)

mod 2 where sk ∈Zn
q is
the secret key and c ∈Zn
q is the ciphertext.
We compute the inner product ⟨sk, c⟩mod q sequentially using a modular arithmetic pro-
gram. The state s ∈Zq tracks the partial sum. Initially s0 = 0, at step i: si = si−1 + ski · ci
(mod q). Each update depends only on the current state and the input bit ski. Specifically: if
ski = 0, state unchanged (si = si−1); if ski = 1, add ci (mod q) (si = si−1 + ci (mod q)). After
processing all n positions, the final state sn = ⟨sk, c⟩mod q. The rounding and mod 2 operations
are then applied to sn. The state space has size q, requiring O(log q) bits to represent. The
program length is O(n) steps, each performing constant-time modular arithmetic.
This result stands in sharp contrast to the generic Barrington-based approach: where Bar-
rington’s theorem would yield width-5 but length O(4log λ) = O(λ2.58), our MA-Program achieves
width O(log λ) and length O(λ log λ)—an exponential improvement in the product w · L that
directly translates to gadget size.
3.1
Symmetric vs. Non-Symmetric Decryption: A Comparative Analysis
To fully appreciate the significance of our MA-Program construction, we now present a detailed
comparison between symmetric and non-symmetric decryption functions. This analysis clarifies
why prior symmetric-function techniques cannot be directly applied to LWE-based schemes, and
how our approach generalizes both cases.
A symmetric-key homomorphic encryption scheme has symmetric decryption if the decryp-
tion function fsk(c) depends only on the Hamming weight of the secret key, i.e., it is invariant
under permutations of the key bits. Formally:
fsk(c) = g
 n
X
i=1
ski · wi(c)
!
10

where wi(c) = wj(c) for all i, j (uniform weights).
We present side-by-side pseudocode for both constructions to highlight the structural differ-
ences:
Algorithm 1 Sinha’s BP for Symmetric Decryption
Require: Secret key sk ∈{0, 1}n, symmetric ciphertext c
Ensure: Decryption bit b ∈{0, 1}
1: c ←0
▷Counter state: O(log n) bits
2: for i = 1 to n do
3:
if ski = 1 then
4:
c ←c + 1
▷Same increment for all positions
5:
end if
6: end for
7: return g(c)
▷Apply symmetric predicate
Algorithm 2 MA-Program for LWE Decryption
Require: Secret key sk ∈{0, 1}n, LWE ciphertext c ∈Zq
Ensure: Decryption bit b ∈{0, 1}
1: s ←0
▷Modular state: O(log q) bits
2: for i = 1 to n do
3:
if ski = 1 then
4:
s ←s + ci (mod q)
▷Position-dependent increment
5:
end if
6: end for
7: return
2
q · s

mod 2
▷Rounding and mod 2
The key difference is in line 4: Sinha’s BP adds a uniform value regardless of position, while
the MA-Program adds position-dependent ciphertext coefficients ci.
Example: XOR-Homomorphic Encryption. Consider a simple scheme where:
• Secret key: sk ∈{0, 1}n,
• Ciphertext: c = m ⊕⟨sk, r⟩mod 2 for random r ∈{0, 1}n,
• Decryption: m = c ⊕PARITY(sk1, . . . , skn) when r = (1, 1, . . . , 1).
Here, decryption computes the parity function, which is symmetric. By Sinha’s Theorem 2.1,
there exists a branching program with:
• Width: w = O(log n) bits (state tracks Hamming weight count),
• Length: L = O(n),
• Gadget size: m = O(n log n) = O(λ log λ) EPR pairs.
Detailed Construction.
The BP for symmetric decryption maintains a counter c ∈
{0, 1, . . . , n}. For each key bit ski:
1. If ski = 0: counter unchanged, c ←c
2. If ski = 1: counter increments, c ←c + 1
11

After processing all n bits, the final count determines the output via the symmetric function
g(c). The counter requires ⌈log2(n + 1)⌉= O(log n) bits of state.
Standard LWE-based decryption is not symmetric. The decryption function is:
HE.Decsk(c) =
$
2
q ·
 n
X
i=1
ski · ci mod q
!'
mod 2
The coefficients ci are arbitrary elements of Zq determined by the ciphertext. Permuting the
key bits changes the weighted sum:
n
X
i=1
ski · ci ̸=
n
X
i=1
skπ(i) · ci
(in general)
This breaks the permutation invariance required for symmetric functions.
Consequently,
Sinha’s O(log n)-width construction does not apply.
Attempting Generic Approaches. Without exploiting structure, we would need:
• Barrington’s theorem: width 5, length O(4log q) = O(q2) = O(λ2.58),
• Direct simulation: width O(n), length O(n).
Both approaches yield gadget sizes of O(λ2.58) or worse.
Our key insight is that while LWE decryption is not symmetric, it has modular structure
that enables efficient computation. The MA-Program tracks partial sums modulo q:
• State space: Zq (requires O(log q) bits);
• Update rule: si = si−1 + ski · ci (mod q);
• Final computation: Rounding and mod 2 on sn.
Table 1 compares the three approaches:
Table 1: Symmetric vs. Non-Symmetric Decryption: Complexity Comparison
Property
Symmetric (Sinha)
LWE (Barrington)
LWE (MA-Program)
Applicable functions
Symmetric only
All Boolean
Modular arithmetic
Width (bits)
O(log λ)
O(1)
O(log λ)
Length
O(λ)
O(λ2.58)
O(λ log λ)
Gadget size
O(λ log λ)
O(λ2.58)
O(λ log2 λ)
Practical for LWE?
No
No
Yes
Key Observations:
1. Sinha’s construction is more efficient for symmetric functions (O(λ log λ) vs. O(λ log2 λ)),
but cannot handle LWE.
2. Barrington’s theorem is general but exponentially inefficient for LWE (O(λ2.58)).
3. Our MA-Program achieves the ”best of both worlds”: logarithmic width (like Sinha) while
handling non-symmetric modular structures (unlike Sinha).
12

3.1.1
Unified Perspective: MA-Program Generalizes Both
The MA-Program framework provides a unified view that encompasses both symmetric and
non-symmetric cases:
• Symmetric case (Z2 counting): Set q = n + 1 and ci = 1 for all i. The MA-Program
tracks
X
ski (mod n + 1), which is equivalent to counting 1s. This reduces to Sinha’s
construction.
• Non-symmetric case (Zq weighted): Use arbitrary ci ∈Zq.
The state tracks the
weighted modular sum, handling the non-permutation-invariant structure of LWE.
This demonstrates that MA-Programs are strictly more general than prior symmetric-
function approaches. They subsume Sinha’s construction as a special case while enabling efficient
computation for the non-symmetric functions that arise in practical lattice-based cryptography.
3.2
Conversion to Standard Branching Programs
While MA-Programs operate naturally over modular state spaces, the garden-hose model re-
quires standard Boolean branching programs.
The following theorem establishes that MA-
Programs can be efficiently converted:
Theorem 3.1 (MA-Program to BP Conversion). An MA-Program over Zm with length L
can be converted to a standard branching program with: Width w = O(log m) bits; Length
L′ = O(L · log m).
Proof. Each state in Zm requires ⌈log2 m⌉bits to represent. We encode each modular arithmetic
operation as Boolean operations on these bits.
Since addition modulo m requires O(log m)
Boolean gates, each MA-Program step expands to O(log m) BP layers.
The width remains
O(log m) because we track the state bits.
This conversion preserves the efficiency gains: for m = q = poly(λ), we have log m =
O(log λ), yielding a branching program with width O(log λ) and length O(λ log2 λ).
Main Theoretical Result.
Combining the above results yields our main theorem:
Theorem 3.2 (Main Result). Let λ be the security parameter. For LWE-based decryption with
modulus q = poly(λ), there exists a quantum gadget construction using m = O(λ log2 λ) EPR
pairs, where w = O(log λ) is the width in bits of the branching program and L = O(λ · log λ) is
its length.
Proof. Combining Lemma 3.1 and Theorem 3.1, we obtain a branching program for LWE de-
cryption with width w = O(log q) = O(log λ) and length L = O(n · log2 λ) = O(λ · log λ) (since
n = poly(λ) for LWE).
Applying Theorem 1.2, the garden-hose complexity is at most w·L = O(λ log2 λ). Each pipe
in the garden-hose protocol corresponds to one EPR pair in the quantum gadget.
This theorem establishes the theoretical foundation for the exponential effi

[…middle truncated for length…]

asurements (which are much faster and more reliable) are per-
formed. This separation is crucial for classical-client QFHE: the client only needs to verify
the measurement outcomes, not the complex state preparation.
Theorem 4.2 (Flow Function for Garden-Hose MBQC). Given a garden-hose protocol with m
pipes and L layers, there exists an MBQC pattern with flow function f that implements the
conditional quantum operation.
Proof. We construct the MBQC pattern as follows. Create a graph G = (V, E) where vertices
correspond to pipe ends and edges connect Alice’s and Bob’s halves of each pipe. Define f :
V \ O →V \ I as: f(vA
ℓ,j) = vB
ℓ,j, f(vB
ℓ,j) = vA
ℓ+1,k where k is determined by the connection
configuration. This flow ensures that measurements proceed layer by layer, with corrections
propagating forward through the computation.
The relationship between branching program parameters and quantum resources reveals
important trade-offs:
Proposition 4.1 (Width-Parallelism Trade-off). For a branching program of width w and
length L: The garden-hose protocol requires m = w·L EPR pairs; The MBQC pattern has depth
O(L) (layer-by-layer evaluation); Within each layer, up to w measurements can be performed
in parallel.
This proposition highlights a fundamental tension: while our logarithmic-width construction
minimizes the total number of EPR pairs, it also limits the available quantum parallelism. For
practical implementations, this trade-off favors our approach, as EPR pair generation is typically
more resource-constrained than measurement parallelism.
4.2
Methodological Comparison: Static vs. Adaptive Quantum Evaluation
To elucidate the fundamental differences between our MBQC-based framework and prior ap-
proaches, we present a systematic comparison with the Barrington-based construction of [DSS16].
DSS16 Approach (Barrington-Based).
The DSS16 construction follows a static precon-
figuration paradigm:
Input(sk, a) →Precompute Connection Config →Execute Garden-Hose Protocol →Output
Here, the connection pattern is predetermined based on the input values and fixed before
protocol execution. Each input corresponds to a static “pipe connection graph.” Conceptually,
this approach uses classical computation to simulate the branching program, then implements
it quantum mechanically.
MBQC+MA-Program Approach.
Our framework employs a dynamic adaptive paradigm:
Prepare Resources →Measure →Flow Function Determines Next Step →Next Measure →· · ·
In this model, connections are dynamically determined—measurement outcomes in real-time
dictate subsequent operations. Flow functions provide global control logic, and measurement
and computation are interleaved.
The efficiency gain stems from our exploitation of LWE’s modular arithmetic structure rather
than generic Boolean circuit simulation.
16

Table 2: Efficiency Comparison: DSS16 vs. MBQC+MA-Program
Metric
DSS16
MBQC+MA (This Work)
Width
5 (constant)
O(log λ)
Length
O(λ2.58)
O(λ log λ)
Gadget Size
O(λ2.58)
O(λ log2 λ)
Concrete Gain
—
215 to 218×
Dynamic Error Handling.
DSS16’s static connections preclude mid-computation correction.
In contrast, our Flow functions can detect anomalous measurement outcomes and request re-
preparation of specific EPR pair layers without restarting the entire computation.
Resource-Computation Separation.
• DSS16: Preparation →Connection →Measurement (tightly coupled)
• MBQC: Preparation (offline) →Measurement (online, Flow-controlled)
This separation enables the client to verify only measurement outcomes while the server
batch-prepares resources—a crucial requirement for classical-client QFHE.
More Natural Quantum Implementation.
DSS16 requires classical preprocessing to de-
termine connections. MBQC measurement outcomes are quantum information, eliminating the
need for classical-to-quantum conversion.
DSS16 (Static Pipes).
Alice and Bob agree beforehand: “If sk = 1, connect pipe A to pipe
B.” Water flows only after all connections are predetermined. This requires knowing all possible
paths in advance.
MBQC (Adaptive Pipes).
Alice and Bob decide dynamically: “Measurement indicates
water is in pipe A; the Flow function dictates the next connection to pipe B.” The path emerges
dynamically during execution.
Remark 4.1 (Key Insight). DSS16 uses quantum mechanics to implement classical branching
programs. Our MBQC+MA approach is natively quantum—leveraging the intrinsic random-
ness of measurement and the global coordination of Flow functions to naturally embed LWE
decryption.
5
MA-Program-Based Gadget and QFHE Scheme
Building upon the unified framework developed in Section 4, we now present our main technical
contribution: the MA-Program-based quantum gadget for conditional P † application and the
complete QFHE scheme. This gadget is the key primitive that enables non-interactive homo-
morphic evaluation of T gates.
Problem Setup and Gadget Definition.
Recall from Section 1.3 that when applying a
T gate to a QOTP-encrypted state, we have: TXaZb |ϕ⟩= PaXaZbT |ϕ⟩. The server holds the
encrypted state P aXaZbT |ϕ⟩and encrypted pad key ˜a = HE.Encpk(a). To obtain a properly
encrypted state, the server needs to apply P † if and only if ˜a = 1.
17

Quantum Gadget Construction.
We convert the garden-hose protocol into a quantum
gadget through the following steps. The gadget uses m = w·L EPR pairs |Φ+⟩⊗m. A connection
between pipe Pℓ,j and pipe Pℓ+1,k is implemented by a Bell measurement on the corresponding
EPR pair halves. The P † gate is embedded at the position where the accepting state flows
through.
The MA-Program gadget consists of: width w = O(log λ), length L′ = poly(λ);
number of EPR pairs m = w · L′; connection graphs G0
ℓ, G1
ℓfor each layer ℓ∈[L′].
Theorem 5.1 (Gadget Correctness). The MA-Program-based quantum gadget GMA-Program
correctly implements conditional P † application.
Proof. The key insight is that the garden-hose protocol faithfully simulates the branching pro-
gram: water (quantum state) flows through pipe j at layer ℓiff the BP state is j at layer ℓ.
Since the BP computes fsk(a) = a, the state reaches the accepting pipe iff a = 1. The P † gate
embedded at this position ensures correct conditional application.
Complete QFHE Scheme.
With the gadget construction established, we now present our
complete QFHE scheme.
Definition 5.1. (Quantum Homomorphic Encryption). A quantum homomorphic encryptions
scheme is a QHE is a tuple of quantum polynomial-time algorithms (QHE.KeyGen, QHE.Eval,
QHE.Dec):
• KeyGeneration. The probabilistic key generation algorithm (pk, sk, evk) ←QHE.KeyGen

1λ
takes a unary representation of the security parameter as input and outputs a classical
public key pk, a classical secret key sk and a classical evaluation key evk.
• Encryption. For every possible value of pk, the quantum channel QHE.Enc pk : D(M) →
D(C) maps a state in the message space M to a state (the cipherstate) in the cipherspace
C.
• Decryption. For every possible value of sk, QHE. Dec sk : D
 C′
→M is a quantum
channel that maps the state in D
 C′
to a quantum state in D(M).
• Homomorphic Circuit Evaluation. For every quantum circuit C , with induced channel ΦC :
D
 M⊗n
→D
 M⊗m
, we define a channel QHE.Eval evk(C, ·) : D
 C⊗n
→D
 C′⊗m
that maps an n-fold cipherstate to an m-fold cipherstate.
Definition 5.2. (Quantum Full Homomorphism and Compactness).
Let λ be the security
parameter. A quantum homomorphic encryption scheme QHE is fully homomorphic, if for any
efficiently computable quantum circuit C with induced channels ΦC : M⊗n(λ) →M⊗m(λ), and
for any input ρ ∈D

M⊗n(λ) ⊗E

, there exists a negligible function negl s.t. for (pk, sk, evk) ←
QHE.KeyGen

1λ
, the state
QHE.Dec ⊗m(λ)
sk

QHE.Eval evk

C, QHE.Enc n(λ)
pk (ρ)

is at most neg(λ)-away in trace distance from the state ΦC(ρ).
A quantum homomorphic encryption is compact if its decryption circuit is independent of
the evaluated circuit.
The scheme is leveled homomorphic encryption(LHE) if it takes 1L as additional input in
key generation, and can only evaluate circuits of T -depth at most L.
Our QFHE scheme ΠMA-Program integrates: (1) A classical HE scheme ΠHE; (2) The MA-
Program-based gadget construction; (3) MBQC for quantum circuit evaluation.
• Key Generation: Generate L + 1 HE key pairs and L gadget keys;
18

• Encryption: Apply QOTP and encrypt pad keys using HE;
• Evaluation: Process MBQC pattern layer by layer; use gadgets for T gates;
• Decryption: Decrypt pad keys and apply inverse QOTP.
Theorem 5.2 (Correctness). Assuming the underlying HE scheme is correct and the MA-
Program gadgets are correct, the QFHE scheme ΠMA-Program is correct for all quantum circuits
of T-depth at most L.
Theorem 5.3 (q-IND-CPA Security). Assuming the underlying HE scheme is IND-CPA secure,
the QFHE scheme ΠMA-Program is q-IND-CPA secure.
Proof Sketch. Security follows from three components: (1) The quantum one-time pad (Lemma 2.1)
provides information-theoretic security for the quantum state—the encrypted state is uniformly
random and independent of the plaintext; (2) The classical LHE scheme provides semantic secu-
rity for the Pauli keys (a, b), ensuring that the encrypted pad keys reveal no information about
the original keys; (3) The gadget evaluation reveals no information beyond what is computed by
the LHE evaluation, as the quantum operations are deterministic given the decrypted control
bits. The use of L+1 independent key pairs avoids circular security issues that arise in schemes
using single-key bootstrapping.
These theorems ensure that our scheme meets the standard security requirements for QFHE.
An important advantage of our scheme is that it avoids circular security assumptions: our
scheme uses L + 1 independent key pairs, avoiding the circular security issues that plague many
homomorphic encryption constructions.
Gadget Complexity.
The gadget size is the primary efficiency metric for QFHE schemes:
Theorem 5.4 (Gadget Size). The MAP-based quantum gadget uses O(w · L) = O(λ log2 λ)
EPR pairs.
Dependency Analysis.
The complexity dependencies across the scheme are:
• EPR pairs: O(n · log2 q) = O(λ · log2 λ)
• Classical evaluation: O(g · poly(λ)) for circuit with g gates
• Key generation: ˜O(L · poly(λ))
• Ciphertext size: O(n + poly(λ)) (compact)
6
Concrete Parameters and Security Analysis
6.1
LWE Parameter Selection
Table 3 presents recommended parameters for different security levels, derived from standard
lattice hardness estimates [Reg09].
These parameters balance security, correctness, and efficiency. The state width log q directly
determines the branching program width, while the dimension n governs the program length.
19

Table 3: Concrete LWE Parameters for QFHE
Parameter
128-bit
192-bit
256-bit
Dimension n
512
768
1024
Modulus q
216
220
224
Error std σ
3.2
3.2
3.2
Log state width
16
20
24
BP length L
214
217
220
EPR pairs
218
222
226
6.2
Security Analysis
This section aims to provide a rigorous security justification for the concrete LWE parameters
proposed in Section 6.1, ensuring that the efficiency improvements claimed in this work are built
on a solid security foundation rather than at the cost of security. The core question to address
is: why can the specific parameter combinations (n, q, σ) in Table 2 achieve 128-, 192-, or 256-bit
security levels?
The security of our scheme fully reduces to the computational hardness of the classical LWE
problem. To this end, we formally state the following core assumption:
Assumption 6.1 (LWE Hardness). For parameters (n, q, σ) as in Table 3, the decision-LWEn,q,χ
problem provides the claimed security level against known classical and quantum attacks, in-
cluding: Primal lattice attacks, Dual lattice attacks and Hybrid attacks.
This assumption is grounded in the foundational work of Regev [Reg09], which reduces the
average-case hardness of LWE to the worst-case hardness of the approximate Shortest Vector
Problem (Approx-SVP) on lattices. This provides a solid theoretical basis for our parameter
choices and emphasizes that security explicitly depends on the values of parameters n, q, and σ.
The conservative choice of σ = 3.2 provides a safety margin against Arora-Ge attacks while
maintaining decryption correctness with overwhelming probability[GHP12]. We conservatively
select the standard deviation of the error distribution as σ = 3.2. This selection is not arbitrary;
instead, it follows rigorous consideration of defense depth against all known attack models,
achieving a delicate trade-off between security and decryption correctness:
1. Against algebraic attacks (e.g., Arora-Ge attack): The Arora-Ge attack and its variants
exploit the ultra-small noise property of LWE, transforming LWE instances into polyno-
mial system solving via linearization techniques. The complexity of such attacks grows
exponentially with the upper bound of noise, approximately O(nd), where d is correlated
with σ. If we choose an extremely small σ (e.g., σ < √n), d becomes sufficiently small to
make the attack feasible in polynomial time. Nevertheless, the value σ = 3.2 drastically
increases the degree d required to construct effective linearized polynomials, triggering
combinatorial explosion in system scale and solving complexity.
Accordingly, σ = 3.2
provides substantial security margins against such algebraic attacks, rendering them com-
pletely infeasible under current and foreseeable computational capabilities.
2. Against hybrid attacks: Hybrid attacks reduce lattice dimensions by guessing partial secret
bits, then execute lattice reduction algorithms on the dimension-reduced lattice.
The
success rate of such attacks highly relies on extra noise introduced by bit guessing. A larger
σ leads to rapid accumulation of error variance in incorrect guessing branches, resulting
in excessive noise in dimension-reduced LWE instances. This prevents subsequent lattice
reduction procedures (e.g., BKZ) from finding sufficiently short vectors. σ = 3.2 supplies
ample noise buffer, making the profit of guessing steps in hybrid attacks far lower than
20

the accompanying computational overhead and noise penalty, thus effectively neutralizing
the advantages of such attacks.
The current construction and security proofs of this work (including Theorem 5.3 and the
aforementioned LWE parameter analysis) are established under the semi-honest server assump-
tion. That is, the server is required to faithfully execute gadget preparation and measurement
operations in strict accordance with protocol specifications, and only attempts to extract extra
information from interaction transcripts. Nevertheless, in real-world deployment scenarios, the
server may behave maliciously, introducing two core categories of risks as follows:
1. Privacy leakage risk: During the gadget preparation phase, a malicious server may de-
viate from the standardized entangled state preparation and distribution procedures. For
instance, the server may deliver non-maximally entangled states or deliberately engineered
quantum states, attempting to extract additional information about the secret key sk from
subsequent client measurement responses. Although our scheme relies on QOTP, whose
randomness conceals plaintexts to a certain extent, the absence of server quantum state
verification mechanisms in the current protocol allows maliciously constructed quantum
channels to break the perfect secrecy of QOTP, resulting in indirect leakage of secret key
information.
2. Function integrity & verification risk: A malicious server may tamper with MBQC
measurement bases or measurement outcomes of gadgets during the evaluation of condi-
tional gates (e.g., P † gates). Since our framework assumes a fully classical client, the client
cannot directly monitor quantum state evolution, and only passively receives final classi-
cal ciphertexts. The server can inject errors to make the decrypted final quantum state
deviate drastically from the expected computation result. Without quantum verification
mechanisms, the client cannot distinguish whether such deviations stem from legitimate
decryption failures or malicious tampering.
Mitigation Pathways: Resolving the above risks is essential for constructing practical malicious-
resistant QFHE. Potential solutions include: Introducing quantum obfuscation or blind verifi-
cation technologies, enabling classical clients to detect server deviations with overwhelming
probability; Adopting trapdoor-based authentication schemes in gadget generation.
However, achieving security against malicious servers while preserving the advantages of
fully classical clients and logarithmic-scale gadget size remains an open problem, and will be
the primary focus of our future research.
6.3
Gadget Size Comparison
To highlight the breakthrough of this work, we directly compare the construction based on
MA-Program with the typical precursor scheme based on Barrington’s theorem (DSS [DSS16]).
Comparative Analysis and Significance:
1. Selection of Comparative Objects: The DSS scheme is a representative work that con-
structs quantum gadgets using Barrington’s theorem. Comparing with it can most purely reflect
the fundamental efficiency differences brought by the core compilation techniques (MA-Program
vs. Barrington).
2.
Substantial Improvements: The table shows that under practical security levels, this
scheme reduces the quantum resource requirements of gadgets by 5 to 6 orders of magnitude
(215 to 218 times). This means that QFHE operations that originally required billions of EPR
pairs can now be realized with only hundreds of thousands of EPR pairs, bringing QFHE from
a theoretical concept into the realm of feasible implementation on future quantum hardware for
the first time.
21

Table 4: Gadget Size Comparison (Concrete Parameters)
Security
DSS EPR Pairs
Our EPR Pairs
128-bit
233
218
192-bit
238
222
256-bit
244
226
The exponential improvement is evident: for 256-bit security, we reduce the gadget size by
a factor of approximately 218 ≈260, 000.