Beyond Indistinguishability: Measuring Extraction Risk in LLM APIs
Ruixuan Liu
Emory University
ruixuan.liu2@emory.edu
David Evans
University of Virginia
evans@virginia.edu
Li Xiong
Emory University
lxiong@emory.edu
Abstract‚ÄîIndistinguishability properties such as differential
privacy bounds or low empirically measured membership
inference are widely treated as proxies to show a model
is sufficiently protected against broader memorization risks.
However, we show that indistinguishability properties are nei-
ther sufficient nor necessary for preventing data extraction
in LLM APIs. We formalize a privacy-game separation be-
tween extraction and indistinguishability-based privacy, show-
ing that indistinguishability and inextractability are incom-
parable: upper-bounding distinguishability does not upper-
bound extractability. To address this gap, we introduce (l, b)-
inextractability as a definition that requires at least 2b expected
queries for any black-box adversary to induce the LLM API
to emit a protected l-gram substring. We instantiate this via a
worst-case extraction game and derive a rank-based extraction
risk upper bound for targeted exact extraction, as well as
extensions to cover untargeted and approximate extraction.
The resulting estimator captures the extraction risk over
multiple attack trials and prefix adaptations. We show that it
can provide a tight and efficient estimation for standard greedy
extraction and an upper bound on the probabilistic extraction
risk given any decoding configuration. We empirically evaluate
extractability across different models, clarifying its connection
to distinguishability, demonstrating its advantage over existing
extraction risk estimators, and providing actionable mitigation
guidelines across model training, API access, and decoding
configurations in LLM API deployment. Our code is publicly
available at: https://github.com/Emory-AIMS/Inextractability.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly con-
sumed through hosted, black-box application programming
interfaces (APIs) [1, 2], which are crucial for building
agentic systems [3] and domain applications [4] at scale.
For practitioners, the API provides a ‚Äúprompt in, text out‚Äù
interface as shown in Figure 1. While a few generation
parameters can be selected by the user, the model‚Äôs weights,
training pipeline, and internal states remain opaque. Even
under this restricted access, some LLMs have been found
to output text in their training data [5, 6], such as emails,
code snippets, and long-form passages, which raises privacy,
copyright infringement, and contextual integrity concerns.
Training
‚ëÝQuery
‚ë§Output
Model Vendor
User
Extraction boundary
‚ë¢Generation 
configuration
‚ë°Forward
‚ë£Sampling and decoding
Figure 1. Overview of black-box LLM API. The adversary controls the
prompt 1‚Éùand some aspects of the generation 3‚Éù. Satisfying our (l, b)-
inextractability definition requires that any black-box adversary needs at
least 2b expected API queries to emit a protected l-gram subsequence.
Several methods have been proposed to measure data
extraction risks in LLMs with varying extraction goals (tar-
geted [7] or untargeted [6]), adversary capabilities (discov-
erable [8] or extractable [5]), and evaluation criterion (exact
match [7] or approximate match [9]). The general concept
of extractability refers to the likelihood or the extent to
which a model emits content from its training data. The
most representative approach [7] identifies a segment as
extractable when it can be greedily generated as a suffix
by the target model when prompted with its prefix.
Beyond heuristic defenses including data deduplica-
tion [10], post-training mitigation [11], and output filter-
ing [9], differentially-private (DP) training [12] is often
advocated as a defense because it provides a theoretical
guarantee. While satisfying the differential privacy definition
provides an upper bound on the worst-case privacy risk
in distinguishing neighboring training datasets, member-
ship inference attacks (MIA) [13, 14] can provide a lower
bound on empirical privacy risk that is often used as a
standard auditing tool [15, 16]. Both DP and MIA focus
on distinguishability which indicates the likelihood that the
presence of one training record (which for language models
is often modeled as a text fragment of some length) can be
distinguished given the model.
A prevailing assumption underlying this use of DP and
MIA is that there is a direct connection between distin-
guishability and extractability. MIA has been used as a key
component for data extraction [6], and MIA risk is believed
to correlate with extraction risk [17]. Several works [18, 19]
derive theoretical upper bounds on reconstruction success
probability given a DP guarantee. Given the reducibility
of certain privacy games [20], mitigating the adversary ad-
vantage in the differential privacy distinguishability (DPD)
arXiv:2604.18697v1 [cs.CR] 20 Apr 2026

game can also mitigate the advantage of other attacks,
including data reconstruction (RC) [18], membership infer-
ence (MI) [13], and attribute inference (AI) [21].
However, this assumption may give a false sense of ex-
traction risk. Recent empirical results show that models can
have weak MIA signals yet still regurgitate different forms
of training data [9, 22] or have high exposure risk [23]. Thus,
it remains an open question: what does indistinguishability
(as measured by a DP bound or low empirical MIA risk)
imply for extractability risk?
Our first goal is to clarify the relationship between indis-
tinguishability and inextractability. Beyond previously noted
contamination and ambiguous membership issues [24], we
reveal that the extraction game is fundamentally separated
from other inference privacy games. While an inference
adversary aims to distinguish whether a sample is in the
training set (either from a data distribution prior or member-
ship prior), an extraction adversary succeeds when the target
model produces an explicit sequence which is not neces-
sarily secret. Therefore, the standard reducibility chain [20]
does not hold for data extraction: reducing distinguishability
risk does not necessarily ensure low extractability risk.
We prove that indistinguishability and inextractability
are neither sufficient nor necessary conditions for each other,
and characterize the conditions under which the reducibility
chain does not hold. We further identify conditions under
which the two risks appear to align, for example, when the
signals used for MIAs are not calibrated by its sample hard-
ness, clarifying what privacy measurements are informative
for estimating extraction risk for an LLM API.
To address the gap between indistinguishability and ex-
traction risk, we introduce (l, b)-inextractability, a definition
which an LLM API satisfies if any black-box adversary
requires at least 2b expected queries to elicit any protected
l-gram sequence. Our inextractability definition is inspired
by and analogous to the differential privacy definition for
indistinguishability. While differential privacy bounds an ad-
versary‚Äôs capability to distinguish membership, ours bounds
the capability of extraction. We propose an extractability
risk estimator that accounts for multiple trials, prefixes, and
decoding choices. Instead of empirical generation or relying
on specific sampling, we estimate the risk via the rank of
the ground truth token‚Äôs sampling probability.
Contributions. Compared to previous empirical extraction
measurement methods [5, 7, 8, 9, 25] that depend on specific
generation configurations, our cost-based measurement pro-
vides an empirical upper bound on extraction risk given any
generation configuration. It provides an efficient estimate
for the standard greedy-decoding extraction [7] and upper
bounds the recent probabilistic extraction measurement [8].
Beyond exact and targeted extraction, we extend the bound
to untargeted and approximate extractions, enabling a uni-
fied extraction risk estimation. Our key contributions are:
1)
Formalizing a privacy-game separation between ex-
traction and classic inference privacy games, show-
ing that indistinguishability and inextractability are
not reducible, and we characterize the conditions
under which they align (Section 2.3).
2)
Analyzing the limitations of existing extraction
measurements (Section 2.4), and introducing a def-
inition of (l, b)-inextractability for LLM APIs (Sec-
tion 3.1) along with a worst-case upper-bound es-
timator based on rank probabilities (Section 3.2).
3)
Demonstrating the generality of our measurement
by providing an efficient estimator for greedy gen-
eration and by upper-bounding the recent prob-
abilistic measurement (Section 3.3). We further
extend the proposed guarantee to untargeted and
approximate extraction (Section 3.4).
4)
Empirically studying the relationship between in-
distinguishability and inextractability, showing the
extraction risk upper bound and the properties of
our measurement with both pre-trained and fine-
tuned LLMs (Section 4).
5)
Outlining and evaluating the effectiveness of mit-
igation strategies including training, API access
control and decoding configuration (Section 5).
2. Unbounded and Underestimated Risks
This section provides background on LLM pipelines
(Section 2.1) and our LLM APIs threat model (Section 2.2).
Then we show that extraction risks are misaligned with
existing distinguishability risks (Section 2.3) and standard
extraction measurements may underestimate the risk due to
their limited generation settings (Section 2.4).
2.1. Preliminaries
An LLM, fŒ∏, is parameterized by weights Œ∏ and trained
on a dataset D = {z(1), z(2), . . . , z(n)} where each z(i) =
(z(i)
1 , z(i)
2 , . . . , z(i)
Li ) is a tokenized sequence from vocabulary
V. At execution time, fŒ∏(v | z(i)
<t) denotes the logits assigned
by fŒ∏ to token v ‚ààV given the preceding context z(i)
<t.
Table 1 summarizes notations we use throughout the paper.
Training. LLMs are trained in an auto-regressive manner to
maximize the likelihood of each token zt given its preceding
context z<t over all training sequences.
Inference. Given a query zp, the model returns the re-
sponse zs by forwarding the query to the model fŒ∏ and
processing its output via a decoding mechanism œï. We
summarize a general pipeline in Algorithm 1 based on
truncation sampling [26]. The pipeline takes as input the
logits ‚Ñì= fŒ∏(¬∑ | z<t) and the decoding parameters, and
outputs the next token. This pipeline covers the decoding
mechanisms commonly used in LLM APIs. For example,
greedy decoding is described by k = 1; top-k selects Vtop as
tokens with top-k Pt(v); top-p truncates by P
v‚ààVtop Pt(v).

TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF NOTATION.
Notation
Description
T
Training algorithm
fŒ∏
Model parameterized by Œ∏
œïk,T
Decoding mechanism with parameters k and T
Pt(v)
Sampling probability for token v ‚ààV at position t
‚ó¶
Concatenation of text or composition of functions
OŒ∏‚ó¶œï
Model API oracle, including model fŒ∏ and decoder œï
m
Number of accessible top token probabilities
A
Extraction mechanism
S
Valid extraction candidate set
D
Training dataset {z(1), z(2), . . . , z(N)}
Dpro
Protected dataset, assumed to be a subset of D
l
Length of sub-sequence
b
Inextractability level; 2b expected queries to oracle O
n
Number of extraction attempts
p
At-least-once extraction success rate over n trials
pz
Single-trial success probability for text z
p‚àó
z
Maximum single-trial success probability for text z
rt
Rank over V of ground-truth token at position t
L
Matching criterion for a successful extraction
(œµ, Œ¥)
Privacy loss parameters for differential privacy
TABLE 2. OUTPUT ACCESSIBILITY AND DECODING CONTROL.
Model API
Probabilities
Decoding Control
OpenAI GPT-5 [27]
No
No
Anthropic Claude [28]
No
Yes
Azure OpenAI API [29]
Top-5
Yes
OpenAI GPT-4 [30]
Top-20
Yes
Gemini [31]
Top-20
Yes
Evaluated API
Top-m
Yes
Algorithm 1 General Pipeline of Truncation Sampling
Inputs: Logits ‚Ñì, temperature T, selected Vtop with size k.
1: Pt(v) ‚ÜêSoftmax(‚Ñì/T)v // Temperature-adjusted
2: ÀúPt(v) ‚ÜêPt(v) if v ‚ààVtop, else 0 // Truncated
3: ÀÜPt(v) ‚ÜêÀúPt(v)/ P
u‚ààV ÀúPt(u) // Re-normalized
Output: A token sampled from ÀÜPt(v)
2.2. Threat Model
We focus on a practical threat model for production
LLMs where only an inference API is available, as illus-
trated in Figure 1. The model vendor trains the model with
training method T using internal dataset D and releases the
inference API oracle, OfŒ∏‚ó¶œïk,T .
Adversary Capability. Table 2 summarizes two key aspects
of access available through existing LLM APIs. Instead of
previous full-probability [32] or text-only access [5], we
consider a general and realistic setting where the model
vendor provides output probabilities for the top-m tokens.
Typically the API in common deployments [30] limits
the number output probabilities return to a maximum of
m = 20. We can cover the range of assumptions from
m = 0 (only receiving the predicted text) to m = |V|
(full access to all logits). In addition, some production APIs
provide users with control over decoding hyperparameters
such as the temperature T and the threshold of top-k/top-p
for determining the selected token set Vtop in Algorithm 1.
For risk measurement, we consider the general setting where
the top-m tokens with sampling probabilities are available
and auditors can control the decoding parameters in œï.
Adversary Goals. The adversary‚Äôs goal is to extract text
fragments in the protected subset of the training data Dpro.
Each element z ‚ààDpro is a sequence of tokens; within
each sequence, any contiguous l-gram zt:t+l is considered
a protected subsequence. This concept covers copyrighted
paragraph with larger l and pre-defined PIIs with shorter l.
We provide a definition of data extraction in Definition 1,
which covers various data extraction attacks considered in
previous works [5, 6, 7]:
Definition 1 (Data Extraction). Given the model oracle O
and a defender-specified extraction set S representing the
protected content under a given matching criterion, data
extraction occurs when (1) a text is generated by the oracle
with some input as ÀÜzs = O(zp), and (2) the generated text
is in the extraction set, ÀÜzs ‚ààS.
For exact data extraction [6], the extraction set includes
exact protected training data, S ‚äÜDpro; for approximate
data extraction [9], the extraction set, S ‚äÜÀúDpro, includes
texts that approximately match the training data. Specif-
ically, given the matching criterion L, the exact match
is L(ÀÜz, z) = I{ÀÜz = z}, and the approximate match is
L(ÀÜz, z) = I{d(ÀÜz, z) ‚â§c} where d(¬∑) is a distance metric
(e.g., 1‚àíBLEU or 1‚àíROUGE-L).
For targeted data extraction [7], the extraction set S =
{zs} for a target z = zp‚ó¶zs only contains the original suffix
associated with its prefix and z ‚ààDpro. For untargeted data
extraction [6], S = {z | z ‚ààDpro, |z| = l} includes all
possible l-gram sequences in the protected training dataset
Dpro. We focus on exact and targeted extraction and assume
Dpro = D for simplicity. We extend to approximate and
untargeted data extraction in later sections.
2.3. Extraction is not Bounded by Inference Risk
Other privacy notions and attacks are often considered
to be useful proxies for extraction risk, but we will show
that they have independent privacy games that are not com-
parable with extraction risk.
Reducibility of distinguishability privacy games. Com-
mon privacy notions include differential privacy distin-
guishability (DPD), membership inference (MI), reconstruc-
tion (RC) and attribute inference (AI). As summarized in
Table 3, all of these focus on the distinguishability of a given
secret: (1) DPD and MI distinguish between two models
trained with z0 or z1; (2) AI distinguishes if the attribute
ÀÜzs is predicted given the target model or drawn from the
distribution; (3) RC distinguishes if an output ÀÜz is generated
from the target model or a prior secret distribution œÄ.

TABLE 3. PRIVACY GAME COMPARISON.
The top four games are distinguishability games, in contrast to data extraction. A‚Ä≤ denotes the secret choosing process in the worst-case attack.
Privacy Game
Secret Construction
Training
Attack
Posterior (p1)
Prior (p0)
DP Distinguishability (DPD)
D, b ‚àà{0, 1}, z0, z1 ‚ÜêA‚Ä≤(T , n)
Œ∏ ‚ÜêT (D ‚à™{zb})
ÀÜb ‚ÜêA(T , Œ∏, D, z0, z1)
Pr[A : ÀÜb = b]
1/2
Reconstruction (RC)
D ‚àºDN‚àí1, z ‚àºœÄ
Œ∏ ‚ÜêT (D ‚à™{z})
ÀÜz ‚ÜêA(T , Œ∏, D)
Pr[A : ÀÜz = z]
Pr[z, ÀÜz ‚àºœÄ : ÀÜz = z]
Membership Inference (MI)
D ‚àºDN‚àí1, b ‚àà{0, 1}, z0, z1 ‚àºD
Œ∏ ‚ÜêT (D ‚à™{zb})
ÀÜb ‚ÜêA(T , D, Œ∏, n, z0)
Pr[A : ÀÜb = b]
1/2
Attribute Inference (AI)
D ‚àºDN, b ‚àà{0, 1}, z0 ‚àºD, z1 ‚àºD
Œ∏ ‚ÜêT (D)
ÀÜzs ‚ÜêA(T , D, n, Œ∏, zp)
Pr[A : ÀÜzs = zs]
Pr[D : ÀÜzs = zs]
Data Extraction (DE)
D ‚àºDN, z = zp ‚ó¶zs ‚àºD
Œ∏ ‚ÜêT (D)
ÀÜzs ‚ÜêA(OŒ∏‚ó¶œï(¬∑), zp)
Pr[A : ÀÜzs = zs]
N/A
Salem et al. established a privacy reducibility chain [20]
among these four notions:
DPD ‚™ØRC ‚™ØMI ‚âàAI
where G1 ‚™ØG2 means the privacy game G1 is reducible
to G2 and is at most as hard to win as G2 with AdvG1 ‚â•
c ¬∑ AdvG2 given some constant c ‚â≥1. The attack advantage
Adv = (p1 ‚àíp0)/(1 ‚àíp0) is the normalized gain on the
success rate p1 compared to the prior p0. Thus, a defense
that can defend against G1 by establishing AdvG1 < a
is also effective against G2 as AdvG2 < a/c. Hence, DP
training is assumed to defend against other attacks, because
DP ensures worst-case bounds for the DPD privacy game.
Recent theoretical analyses [18, 19] establish the DP bound
on reconstruction (RC) risk as in Theorem 1:
Theorem 1 (Reconstruction Bound from DP [19]). Let
T (D) be a training algorithm that satisfies (œµ, Œ¥)-DP, with
training dataset D ‚àºDN, output Œ∏ ‚äÜSupp(T ). Denoting
a specific attack guess is ÀÜz = A(Œ∏), then for any output Œ∏
and any training sample z ‚ààD we have:
Pr
z‚ààD[L(ÀÜz, z) = 1] ‚â§
eœµ
eœµ ‚àí1 +
1
Prz‚àºD[L(ÀÜz,z)=1]
+ Œ¥.
Essentially, DP bounds p1/p0, the ratio between the re-
construction posterior given the target model fŒ∏ or a
known prior distribution œÄ. (A slightly looser bound of
eœµ ¬∑ Prz‚àºD[L(ÀÜz, z) = 1] + Œ¥ is proven by Cohen et al. [33].)
Separated privacy game of extractability. However, data
extraction (DE) in Definition 1 has non-trivial distinctions
between above privacy games, even for reconstruction (RC)
which has the similar goal to extract or recover training
samples. To highlight the distinctions between data extrac-
tion and reconstruction, we plot the probability of extracting
a short fragment from a prior (GPT-2) or a model (posterior)
in Figure 2. We note that reconstruction focuses the relative
increase of the posterior probability (p1) over the prior prob-
ability (p0) (reddish area), similar to other distinguishability
games and the ratio that is at the core of the differential
privacy definition. In contrast, data extraction focuses on the
absolute posterior probability (p1, shaded blue in Figure 2).
Therefore, we need to separate the extractability game
with distinguishability games. The separation matters for
two reasons: 1) The practical threat of verbatim generation is
not limited to leaking private information, but also includes
the risk that the model would output copyrighted material or
violate contextual integrity. A protected content with a high
Figure 2. Partially independent risks of distinguishability (high posterior
advantage over prior p1 ‚â´p0, reddish area) and extractability (high
posterior p1, blue area). Each dot represents one short email fragment from
the Enron dataset using the generation probability on fine-tuned GPT-2 as
posterior and following Swanberg et al. [19] to compute the prior on GPT-
2. Points in the blue triangle show that distinguishability is unnecessary
for extractability‚Äîthe extractability risk is high, but the reconstruction risk
is not significant given the relatively small advantage p1/p0; points in the
reddish area show that distinguishability is insufficient for extractability‚Äî
the reconstruction advantage is significant, but the extraction risk is low.
prior (e.g., a famous copyrighted book) does not indicate
that it can be freely emitted. 2) Bounding the advantage of
the posterior, as in Theorem 1, does not indicate concrete
extraction risk level, especially when the prior cannot be
accurately estimated as is typical for natural language.
Implications of separated privacy games. Clarifying the
differences between these distinct privacy games helps re-
solve common misunderstandings about extractability de-
fenses and attacks and explains previous counter-intuitive
observations in the literature.
1) A false sense of extractability risk. While DP training
bounds distinguishability risk, it does not constrain ex-
tractability risk. Even if a model exhibits low risk under
distinguishability-based privacy games (including DPD, RC,
MI and AI), its extractability risk may remain high. For
example, a DP-trained model that has negligible member-
ship inference against a strong adversary can still output
high posterior training data even with a strict privacy bud-
get [23]. We formalize this in Theorem 2, showing that a
low distinguishability risk does not necessarily indicate a

Figure 3. Observed correlation between distinguishability (as measured using four membership inference attacks) and extractability.
low extractability risk when p0 is large or Œµ is small.
Theorem 2 (DPD Ã∏‚™ØDE). Resilience of DPD does not imply
the resilience of data extraction.
Proof. Let a training pipeline T satisfy (œµ, Œ¥)-DP, and
thus be resilient against DPD as defined in Table 3.
The DPD advantage is bounded by the privacy budget as
AdvDPD(A) ‚â§
eœµ‚àí1+2Œ¥
eœµ+1
[34]. Since extractability focuses
on the posterior, AdvDE(A) = p1 ‚â§
eœµ
eœµ‚àí1+1/p0 + Œ¥ given
Theorem 1 with the prior p0 = Prz‚àºD[L(ÀÜz, z) = 1]. Setting
Œ¥ = 0, DPD cannot be reduced to DE when
eœµ ‚àí1
eœµ + 1 <
eœµ
eœµ ‚àí1 + 1
p0
(1)
This inequality holds if and only if p0 >
eœµ‚àí1
3eœµ‚àí1. For fixed
œµ, choose p0 >
eœµ‚àí1
3eœµ‚àí1; since this threshold approaches 1
3 as
œµ ‚Üí‚àû, setting p0 > 1
3 suffices for all œµ > 0. For fixed
p0, the inequality holds for all œµ > 0 when p0 > 1
3, while
p0 < 1
3 requires œµ < ln

1‚àíp0
1‚àí3p0

< 1.94.
2) A false sense of distinguishability risk. Similarly, we show
in Theorem 3 that a model that shows low extractability
risk does not necessarily have low distinguishability risk.
A recent experimental work [14] supports this claim by
showing that samples with low extraction risk are still
distinguishable by membership inference attacks.
Theorem 3 (DE Ã∏‚™ØDPD). Resilience to DE does not imply
a bound on distinguishability risk of DPD.
Proof. Similarly, given above upper bounds for AdvDE
and AdvDPD, there are two cases where the reducibility con-
dition of DE ‚™ØDPD does not hold: 1) the prior p0 ‚â™1/3;
and 2) fixing p0, the privacy budget œµ > ln

1‚àíp0
1‚àí3p0

.
Explaining apparently-inconsistent observations. It is
commonly assumed that there is a direct connection [6, 17]
between MIA and extraction, such as using sample-level
MIA signal to identify data extraction. However, prior works
have shown variation between membership inference and
extraction risks. For example, recent works [14, 23] observe
that distinguishability risk does not indicate extraction risk.
We find that both observations essentially align with
our Theorem 2 and Theorem 3, although they appear con-
flicting under certain conditions. The main cause behind
such confusion is the membership inference attack signals.
We show the interplay between membership inference (MI)
risk and data extraction (DE) risk in Figure 3 on a fine-
tuned GPT-2 for four different MIA signals: Loss [35],
MinK [32], Zlib [6] and Ref-Loss [36]. Different MIA
signal are normalized to the same scale, and we compute
the extraction probability using the method from Hayes et
al. [8]. There is a clear trend that the correlation between MI
and DE is stronger for non-calibrated signals (Loss, MinK)
and weaker for calibrated signals (Zlib, Ref-Loss).
This sheds light on seemingly conflicting observations
in prior work. The direct connection between MIA and
DE is discussed using a loss-based MIA signal [17]. This
occurs because non-calibrated signals (Loss, MinK) reflect
the model‚Äôs absolute posterior confidence, which directly
aligns with the extraction objective. In contrast, lower cor-
relation [14] is observed with the calibrated signals (Zlib,
Ref-Loss). The calibration normalizes the confidence via a
sample hardness factor such as the zlib entropy or reference-
model perplexity, leading to the relative confidence improve-
ment (posterior over prior) in generating a sample, which
aligns with the MIA objective. Hence, MIA can appear
correlated or uncorrelated with extraction risk, even though
both originate from the same underlying model behavior.
2.4. Suboptimal Attacks Underestimate Risk
From the above discussion, only data extraction attacks
directly audit extractability. As summarized in Table 4,
previous extraction attacks either estimate a lower bound
(i.e., extractable) [5] or upper bound (i.e., discoverable) [8]
on extraction risk. We focus on the worst-case risk (i.e.,
upper bound) because a single extraction can cause irre-
versible harm regardless of average-case behavior. More-
over, bounding the worst-case risk provides a rigorous and
distribution-independent metric for evaluating and compar-
ing defense mechanisms. However, current upper-bound es-
timation methods are prone to underestimating the risk due
to suboptimal attack strategies.
Extraction is a discoverable game. Most data extraction

TABLE 4. COMPARISON OF EXTRACTION OR MEMORIZATION EVALUATION METHODS.
Goal symbols:
targeted,
untargeted,
both. Tier indicates the relative bound category (Upper or Lower) reported by the original works.
Method
Goal
Approx.
Multiple Trials
Prefix
Decoding
Metric
Estimated Risk
[6]
√ó
‚úì
No prefix / Internet snippets
Beam-search + Temperature
k-Eidetic
Lower bound
[5]
√ó
‚úì
Internet snippets / Repeated tokens
Limited by APIs
n-gram match
Lower bound
[9]
√ó /‚úì
√ó
Working
Greedy
BLEU
Lower bound
[8]
√ó /‚úì
‚úì
Original
Top-k + Temperature
(n, p)-discoverable
Upper bound
[7]
√ó
√ó
Original
Greedy / Beam-search
k-extractable
Upper bound
[25]
√ó
√ó
Original
Greedy
Memorization score
Upper bound
[37]
‚úì
√ó
Original
Greedy
Counterfactual memorization
Upper bound
[38]
‚úì
√ó
Optimized (Init. w/original prefix)
Greedy
ROUGE-L
Upper bound
[39]
√ó
√ó
Optimized (Init. w/random prefix)
Greedy
Compression ratio
Lower bound
Ours
√ó / ‚úì
‚úì
Empirically optimal (w/all original)
Optimal decoding
(l, b)-inextractability
Upper bound
attacks only conduct one time generation and estimate the
extraction risk given the binary result of extraction or not.
However, the extractability is a discoverable game [8] where
the chance of a successful extraction increases when attack-
ers can query more times. For example, given the extraction
probability of one sample as pz, the probability that it can
be extracted after n independent trails is 1 ‚àí(1 ‚àípz)n.
Suboptimal prefix for discoverable extraction. Text drawn
from the internet or divergent prompts (e.g., ‚Äúpoem poem
poem‚Äù) can serve as prefixes to extract training data [5], but
these methods primarily estimate the extraction risk (i.e., the
lower bound) assuming the adversary has no access to the
target text. To assess the discoverable extraction risk (i.e.,
the upper bound) from a conservative defender‚Äôs perspective,
prior works [7, 8, 25, 37] assume that the complete training
sample is known and the original prefix is the most effective
trigger to generate its suffix. However, these works use a
fixed length prefix, and do not consider extending the prefix
adaptively. Other works [38, 39] use adversarially-optimized
prefixes to improve the likelihood of generating a suffix,
but the optimality is not guaranteed and the optimization
requires extra trials.
Suboptimal decoding for discoverable extraction. As
summarized in Table 4, most prior works use greedy de-
coding to generate outputs, effectively setting |Vtop| = 1
in Algorithm 1. A few works [5, 8] use specific decod-
ing configurations with fixed temperature or top-k settings.
Beam-search heuristically searches for the highest likelihood
generated sequence [6, 7], but the beam width is capped and
performing beam-search requires extra queries. Evidence in
previous results [7, 8, 40] indicates that using non-greedy
decoding sometimes slightly increases the extraction rate.
However, any fixed decoding hyperparameters are unlikely
to be optimal, leaving an unknown gap between the empir-
ical estimate and actual worst-case extraction risk.
3. Black-Box Extraction Risk
To avoid misleading conclusions from distinguishability-
based guarantees, we propose a direct definition of inex-
tractability (Section 3.1). To avoid underestimating risk, our
definition provides a formal upper bound on worst-case data
extraction risk (Section 3.2) via a Data Extraction game
analogous to the DPD game for the differential privacy def-
inition. Then we discuss connections to existing generation-
based and probabilistic measurements (Section 3.3). In Sec-
tion 3.4, we extend to other extraction variants such as
untargeted extraction and approximate matching criterion.
As summarized in Table 4, this section resolves the
limitations of previous measurement methods noted in Sec-
tion 2.4 and demonstrates the generality of our method.
3.1. Inextractability Definition
Inspired by the differential privacy definition, which
bounds the worst-case probability that an adversary can
distinguish between neighboring datasets, we define inex-
tractability by bounding the worst-case extraction risk of
the most extractable subsequence in the protected dataset.
Cost-bounding extraction. Unlike inference games, extrac-
tion is a discoverable game where more attack attempts
increase the probability of success [8]. In the extreme case,
any text may be extracted as the number of independent ex-
traction attempts approaches infinity, n ‚Üí‚àû. We therefore
couple extraction success with query cost for meaningful
security. Following conventions in cryptography, b-bit se-
curity means that any attacker that successfully breaks the
cryptographic primitive must incur a cost n and achieve a
success probability p such that n/p ‚â•2b [41]. Thus, we
naturally derive Definition 2, where the protected set Dpro
in practice can be text collected from a sensitive domain
(e.g., clinical notes) or copyrighted source (e.g., books).
Definition 2 (Inextractability). An oracle O to an LLM
satisfies (l, b)-inextractability with respect to a protected
data set Dpro ‚äÜD if the expected number of independent
trials required to extract any subsequence z ‚ààDpro of at
least l grams via O is at least 2b.
Similarly to the definition of security level in cryptography,
we quantify the inextractability as the expected effort needed
by a worst-case attack for a successful extraction. The cost-
based definition indicates that extraction is theoretically pos-
sible but requires at least 2b trials; thus a smaller b suggests
a higher extraction risk, while a larger b makes extraction
economically infeasible. It naturally captures the risk under

multiple trials and provides a decoding-independent upper
bound on extraction risk. While Hayes et al.‚Äôs definition of
(n, p)-discoverable [8] also captures the multi-trial risk, it
relies on a fixed decoding strategy.
To construct the n-trial worst-case extraction game, we
assume each trial has the optimal strategy and derive the
overall maximum extraction success in Lemma 1 (proof
in Appendix B). We show how to estimate the optimal
probability p‚àó
z in Section 3.2.
Lemma 1 (Optimality of Independent Strategy). Let p‚àó
z be
the highest single-trial extraction probability for any l-gram
suffix zs in z. For any (possibly adaptive) n-trial strategy
An the probability of extracting zs in n attempts is at most
Pr
"
n
[
j=1
{Aj(O, zp) = zs}
#
‚â§p = 1 ‚àí(1 ‚àíp‚àó
z)n,
(2)
where the equality is achievable by performing n indepen-
dent repetitions of an optimal single-attempt strategy.
Connection to min-entropy. Lemma 1 shows how ex-
traction success grows with repeated trials, analogous with
guessing a password with sufficient queries. We relate
this success growth to the attack cost underlying a min-
entropy characterization, establishing a formal link between
inextractability and information-theoretic security. For an
interface O satisfying (l, b)-inextractability, by definition, it
requires at least 2b expected attempts to extract any l-gram
text. This translates to the constraint that ‚àÄz ‚ààDpro:
2b ‚â§n
p
‚áí
b ‚â§log2

n
1 ‚àí(1 ‚àípz)n

(3)
The right side of the inequality is a monotonically
increasing function with respect to n. The attack success
increases more slowly than the increase of cost, indicating
that the most highest cost‚Äìsuccess ratio is achieved by a
single optimal trial. Therefore, taking the tightest bound over
all z ‚ààDpro, we have:
b = min
z‚ààDpro(‚àílog2 pz) = ‚àílog2

max
z‚ààDpro pz

(4)
This directly connects to the min-entropy of Dpro under
the optimal adversary strategy with n-trials A‚àó
n:
H‚àû(Dpro|A‚àó
n) = ‚àílog2

max
z‚ààDpro Pr[A‚àó
n(Œ∏) = z]

(5)
Intuitively, min-entropy measures how predictable the
most extractable subsequence is. Analogous to evaluating
the security level of a cryptographic system, Lemma 2
establishes that bounding inextractability in Definition 2 is
equivalent to ensuring a minimum entropy threshold:
Lemma 2 (Equivalence of Inextractability and Min-En-
tropy). If an interface O satisfies (l, b)-inextractability with
respect to a protected set Dpro, it ensures the min-entropy
H‚àû(Dpro|A) ‚â•b for any adversary A.
Range of extraction cost. To interpret the extraction risk
at level b in practice, we characterize its range from cases
where an attacker can guess the secret in a single trial to
cases where extracting a suffix from the model is no easier
than sampling from a na√Øve baseline distribution. When the
model strongly memorizes a secret z, e.g., each ground truth
token of it has the highest sampling probability, a greedy
decoding results in the minimum extraction cost, b = 0.
The maximum value of b represents the min-entropy
of Dpro without the model access oracle, H‚àû(Dpro). The
gap H‚àû(Dpro) ‚àíb represents the information leakage [42]
enabled by access to the target model. Given vocabulary
size |V| and length l, the whole secret space is |V|l and
H‚àû(Dpro) ‚â§l log2(|V|), where the equation holds with a
uniform distribution over all possible sub-sequences.
Since the natural language space is highly non-uniform,
a tighter estimation on H‚àû(Dpro) requires an assumption on
the prior distribution of Dpro. An unconditioned prior [19]
assumes a token distribution over the vocabulary, e.g., by
Zipf‚Äôs law, and independently samples each token from this
distribution. A conditioned prior requires a general model
trained without the protected data.
We emphasize that these prior distributions rely on
strong assumptions, and the obtained min-entropy only acts
as a reference to select a cost budget b that reflects the
maximum reasonable attacker investment. In general, we
have the valid range of 0 ‚â§b ‚â§l log2(|V|).
3.2. Worst-Case API Extraction Game
According to Lemma 1, to upper bound the worst-case
extraction risk over n trials, we need to construct the optimal
attack that obtains an upper bound on pz for each trial.
Threat model for worst-case extraction. Following ex-
isting discoverable extraction measurements [8, 38], we
assume that the adversary has access to the complete text z.
The goal is to extract the suffix ÀÜzs = zs from the model API
oracle as ÀÜzs ‚ÜêA(OfŒ∏‚ó¶œï‚àó, z‚àó
p), where the optimal decoding
mechanism and prefix œï‚àó, z‚àó
p ‚ÜêA‚Ä≤(Œ∏, z) are the output of
another adversary procedure given the access to the model
and the text. We consider the setting in Table 2 where O
releases the probabilities for the top-m candidate tokens and
œï has customizable decoding parameters k and T.
Optimal prefix for verbatim extraction. As discussed in
Section 2.4, the standard fixed-length prefix is sub-optimal.
To understand how much potential improvement is possible
with an optimized prefix, we conducted experiments sum-
marized in Figure 4. Even though the optimization consumes
hundreds of times more queries to construct the optimized
prefix, we find that it barely outperforms the original prefix
with |zp| = 50. Across all of our experiments, we find that
using all of the preceding tokens as the prefix provides the
highest likelihood of extracting the suffix, although for most
of our tests the increase over the 100-token fixed length
prefix is small. An adversary with fixed resources would be

50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Suffix End Position in the Complete Sequence
200
150
100
50
0
Average Log-Likelihood
Divergent
Optimized
No Prefix
Fixed-10
Fixed-50
Fixed-100
All
Figure 4. Comparison of extraction prefixes. The log-likelihood is averaged over 200 extractions from the Enron dataset (suffix length l = 50) using a
fine-tuned GPT-2 with temperature T = 1. Higher log-likelihood indicates a better prefix for extraction. All (ours): uses all preceding tokens as the prefix
for predicting the suffix starting at each position. Divergent [5]: employs the divergent attack with their repeating-token prompt. Optimized [38]: initializes
with the original 100-token prefix and iteratively optimizes it for 72 steps with a balanced objective that maximizes the longest common subsequence
(LCS) while reducing overlap. No Prefix: uses the empty start-of-sequence token as prefix. Fixed-|zp|: uses a fixed |zp|-gram original prefix.
Temperature T
Extraction Probability (log-scale)
Top-k
Top-k
Figure 5. Extraction probability of fine-tuned GPT-2 with l = 50, showing
two training samples have different preferences on the decoding parameters,
especially for the configuration such as top-k that determines the truncation
level. T = 1 is the best as it aligns with the training objective.
100
101
102
103
Avg/Max Token Rank Per Sample
100
101
102
103
104
Optimal Top-K
100-sample summary with T=1.0
Average
Max
0
50
100
150
Average Rank Value
100
101
Count
Distribution of Average Ranks per Sample
0
2000
4000
6000
Max Rank Value
100
101
Count
Distribution of Max Ranks per Sample
Figure 6.
The optimal decoding parameter k directly aligns with the
sample‚Äôs maximum token rank. The large per-sample variations make fixed
decoding configurations sub-optimal for extraction risk.
more likely to succeed by using more queries with a 100-
token fixed length prefix, than by incurring the additional
cost of finding an optimal prefix or using a longer prefix.
Optimal decoding. As illustrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6,
the decoding strategy substantially shifts the extraction prob-
ability pz, and its effect is empirically non-monotonic across
samples. A configuration that helps one extraction (e.g.,
smaller truncation to concentrate mass) may hurt another
(e.g., excluding a mid-rank token). Hence, using a fixed
decoding systematically underestimates the worst-case risk.
Inspired by Figure 5 and Figure 6, the optimal truncation
size k st

[‚Ä¶middle truncated for length‚Ä¶]

 [45] on
the Enron email dataset [46] to evaluate risk of fine-tuning
data, and use LlaMA-3.1-8B [47] on the Pile [48] and
BookSum [49] to evaluate pre-training data extraction.
4.1. Extractability and Distinguishability
Comparing various MIAs with different signals and our
estimated extraction cost, we obtain results similar to Fig-
ure 3 and include one example with l = 50 in Figure 19
(in the Appendix). Figure 8 summarizes the correlation co-
efficient between the different membership inference attack
signals and extraction cost.
Influence of extraction sequence length. For all MIA sig-
nals, a consistent observation is that the correlation between
indistinguishability and extractability increases with longer
sequences with larger l. This is because shorter member or
non-member samples are more ambiguous than longer se-
quences [24], blurring the correlation between extractability
and distinguishability.
Influence of membership signal. Consistent with our dis-
cussion in Section 2.3, the calibration-based MIA signals
(Zlib, Ref-Loss) have less correlation with the extraction
costs than uncalibrated MIA signals (Loss, Mink). From
the AUC of different MIAs (Figure 18 in Appendix), we
reveal that the correlation between distinguishability and
extractability depends more on whether the MIA signal is
uncalibrated than on its ability to distinguish members.
Influence of text properties. We analyze the underlying
properties for a text subsequence to have high distinguisha-
bility risk or extractability risk from the following aspects:
1) complexity, including structural complexity Zlib‚Üëand lex-
ical complexity TF-IDF‚Üë; 2) diversity (Shannon entropy‚Üë);
3) uniqueness, including n-gram level (MinHash-based Jac-
card Similarity‚Üì), and semantic level (kNN density‚Üì). We
use the best-performing reference-model [36] signal to in-
dicate the per-sample MIA risk, and use our measurement
to indicate the per-sample extraction risk. For a transparent
Zlib
Shannon
Target PPL
Ref PPL
MinHash
TF-IDF
kNN
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Member: 11.4% Non-member: 5.0%
High Extraction + Low MIA
Zlib
Shannon
Target PPL
Ref PPL
MinHash
TF-IDF
kNN
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Member: 20.9% Non-member: 1.1%
High Extraction + High MIA
Zlib
Shannon
Target PPL
Ref PPL
MinHash
TF-IDF
kNN
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Member: 13.2% Non-member: 87.2%
Low Extraction + Low MIA
Zlib
Shannon
Target PPL
Ref PPL
MinHash
TF-IDF
kNN
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Member: 54.6% Non-member: 6.7%
Low Extraction + High MIA
Member
Non-member
Figure 9.
Radar charts comparing text properties (Zlib, Shannon en-
tropy, Target/Ref PPL, MinHash, TF-IDF) between member (blue) and
non-member (orange) samples, on a fine-tuned GPT-2 model (Enron,
l = 500, m = 20). Axes show mean empirical quantiles (0-1) within
each group, stratified by high extraction risk (cost< 1000) and high MIA
risk (confidence> 0.95). Groups percentages indicate the fraction of all
member / non-member samples falling into each group.
data split in MIA, we demonstrate with GPT-2 fine-tuned
with the Enron dataset. To train the reference model, we
use an auxiliary set disjoint from fine-tuning data.
Factors influencing extractability. The radar plots in Fig-
ure 9 reveal two distinct vulnerability modes. (1) Low-
complexity / low-diversity texts: with low structural (Zlib) or
lexical (TF‚ÄìIDF) complexity and low diversity (Shannon),
such as form emails and boilerplate notices; their repet-
itive structure concentrates probability mass and enables
deterministic regeneration. (2) High-uniqueness texts: high
n-gram distinctness (low MinHash similarity) and sparse
semantic neighborhoods (low kNN density), whose continu-
ations lie in a narrow token set, making exact suffix emission
likely once the prefix is known. We show in Appendix A that
the two types are neither identical nor mutually exclusive
with 0.3‚Äì0.5 Spearman correlation.
Implication. Na√Øve deduplication can backfire‚Äîaggressively
removing near-duplicates may elevate relative n-gram or
semantic uniqueness and increase worst-case extractability.
Factors influencing distinguishability. In contrast, Figure 9
indicates membership inference risk is not strongly asso-
ciated with structural or lexical complexity; the dominant
driver is the per-sample perplexity improvement from the
reference model to the target model. The ‚ÄúHigh MIA‚Äù group
occupies a larger aggregate radar area without extreme sim-
plicity, indicating that extraction and membership inference
target partially disjoint victim sets.

Implication. Audits limited to MIAs may miss samples that
are at highest extraction risk under a worst-case attack.
4.2. Comparing Extraction Risk Measurements
We compare our measurement with both generation-
based and probability-based measurements in Figure 10.
Limitations of empirical generation. In Figure 10 (Left),
the extraction ratio with greedy decoding does not scale
with n because it is deterministic. And the extraction ratio
is low for two reasons: (1) the limited prefix length |zp| is
less informative than using the full preceding context; and
(2) for the chunked version, the chunking procedure misses
vulnerable samples across chunk boundaries.
Limitations of probabilistic extraction. While the extrac-
tion ratio of (n, p)-discovery in Figure 10 (Left) scales with
n, (1) it is inferior to greedy generation with small n and
high success probability threshold p = 0.99 because the
specific decoding with k = 40 dilutes the rank-1 confident
tokens; (2) from Figure 10 (Right), the optimal decoding
configuration influences the extraction ratio and the optimal
choice is inconsistent across n; and (3) the extraction ratio
is capped at around 0.015 even with a very large n = 105
because samples whose ground-truth token rank exceeds the
truncation size k have their sampling probability truncated
to zero and can never be extracted.
Our advantage. Our Algorithm 2 provides a better overall
upper bound than other measurements, as a result of using
all prefix and optimal decoding. In Figure 10 (Middle),
our Algorithm 3 tightly estimates the greedy generation
on chunked text with fixed prefix. Using the full prefix
allows us to find more vulnerable samples with n = 1.
Further, the efficiency of Algorithm 3 allows us to scan
all sliding window text, avoiding missing any vulnerable
sequences. As seen in Figure 10 (Right), our Algorithm 2
provides a consistent risk upper bound without relying on a
specific decoding mechanism œï. In practice, nstable avoids
underestimating the risk because it captures tail samples
with p‚àó
z approaching 0.
4.3. Understanding Extraction Cost
Our Definition 2 assumes a strong adversary able to
control the prefix and decoding strategy to maximize suffix
recovery. Because real attackers cannot achieve this ideal-
ized power, we analyze the gap between the theoretical cost
2b (with 1 ‚â§b ‚â§l log2 |V|) and realistic cost.
Maximum cost from blind tests. Figure 11 shows three
blind baselines approximating the minimum extraction cost
without access to the target model: (1) Uniform, tokens sam-
pled uniformly; (2) Unigram; sampled from empirical token
frequencies; and (3) Contextual, proxy LM conditioned on
preceding tokens. Stronger priors progressively lower cost.
For many subsequences, access to the target model collapses
the minimum b from around 10 (contextual blind) to near
0, highlighting vulnerable samples. Blind baselines thus
provide conservative (contextual) and optimistic (unigram)
resilience thresholds.
Minimum cost from in-context test. In Figure 11, we
define an in-context baseline where the target suffix is fully
revealed in the prompt. Specifically, given a complete text
z, we prompt the target model as follows:
Prompt: Please repeat after me: "Mine ear is open, and my
heart prepared". Mine ear is open, and my
‚ÜíExpected: heart prepared
The optimal decoding cost œï‚àóunder this repeat prompt
sets a practical lower bound bctx on realistic leakage. If a
subsequence‚Äôs cost falls below bctx, it is flagged as high-
risk. Over 99% of protected subsequences remain below the
in-context baseline even with repeated prompts, indicating
extraction of content from training data rather than explicit
context leakage.
Calibrated extraction cost. To filter out common mem-
orization, prior works introduce the notion of counterfac-
tual memorization [37, 50], which calibrates memorization
scores using a proxy model that has not seen the target sam-
ple. As shown in Figure 12, samples with low extraction cost
tend to exhibit non-negative counterfactual memorization,
indicating that our extraction cost can effectively identify
uncommon memorization.
Member vs. non-member. In Figure 13, we compare the
extractability of training (member) and non-training (non-
member) for fine-tuned (Left) and pre-trained (Right) mod-
els. We observe that members consistently exhibit higher
extraction portion than non-members given b. For the fine-
tuned GPT-2 on Enron, we compare by the ratio of extrac-
tion portions to quantify the memorization gain from being
included in training. A larger member-to-non-member ratio
indicates that member samples are substantially easier to
extract. The gap is generally small, because members and
non-members are randomly split and the model generalizes
well. For both fine-tuned and pre-trained models, there exist
non-member samples that can be extracted with low cost,
implying that verbatim generation does not require direct
inclusion in training data [22].
Influence of sequence length. Longer sequences (larger l)
naturally correspond to higher extraction costs, as probabil-
ity of extraction decays with l. In Figure 13 (Left), the ratio
increases with larger l, for two reasons: (1) short sequences
of members and non-members overlap more easily, making
attribution ambiguous [24]; (2) short suffixes even overlap
with their prefixes, so they are likely to be retrieved than
generated. Hence, in practice, l should be chosen large
enough to avoid overlap between the prefix and the suffix.
Influence of model size. As shown in Figure 13 (Right),
larger models (darker lines) tend to have lower extraction
costs than smaller models. The member‚Äìnon-member gap
is also more pronounced for pre-trained models, possibly
due to the unknown training corpora differences.

100
101
102
103
104
105
Number of Queries (n)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
Portion of Extraction
Empirical Greedy (chunked, |zp| = l)
Estimated Greedy (sliding, z *
p )
(n, p)-discover (p=0.1)
(n, p)-discover (p=0.99)
Ours (m=20, p=0.1)
Ours (m=20, p=0.99)
Ours (m=|V|, p=0.1)
Ours (m=|V|, p=0.99)
Exact
BLEU(>0.75) ROUGE_L(>0.5)
Edit(<10)
Matching Criterion
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Extraction Ratio (m = |V|)
Empirical (Chunked, |zp| = l)
Estimated (Chunked, |zp| = l)
Estimated (Chunked, z *
p )
Estimated (Sliding, z *
p )
n = 1
n = 210
n = 232
n =
Number of Queries (n)
10
5
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Extraction Ratio (p = 0.99)
Ours (m = |V|, nstable)
Ours (m = |V|, nexact)
(n, p)-discover (K=1)
(n, p)-discover (K=40)
(n, p)-discover (K=126112)
(n, p)-discover (K=|V|)
Figure 10. Comparison with generation-based [7] and probabilistic extraction [8] on Llama-3.1-8B with Pile-CC. The extraction portion denotes the ratio of
extractable sub-sequences identified across 9√ó105 sliding windows of length l = 50. (Left) is exact extraction comparison. (Middle): the tight estimation
of Algorithm 3 on greedy generation across different matching metrics with n = 1, and our advantage of using all prefix and comprehensive scanning
via efficient sliding window. (Right): compares probabilistic extraction with Œ¥ = 0.01 across truncation size k; k = 126122 is the maximum true token
rank rt over all samples; nexact and nstable denote the exact and approximated numbers for required trials to achieve success rate of 1-Œ¥ in Definition 3.
0
1
10
100
1000
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Portion of Subsequences
Target Model
Uniform (max b=169)
Unigram (max b=196)
Contextual (max b=inf)
b
bctx (99.29%)
Figure 11. Analysis of valid b range on extracting Pile-CC (m = 20, l =
10) from Llama-3.1-8B. Blind baselines: Uniform, Unigram, and Contex-
tual have progressively stronger priors. In-context baseline: assumes the
target suffix appears in the prefix, providing a threshold bctx. Subsequences
with cost below bctx are highly vulnerable, while those exceeding the
maximum blind-baseline cost are comparatively less vulnerable.
Figure 12. Privacy cost comparison on the Pile-CC (m = 20, L = 50).
Each point represents one subsequence. Across 483,485 subsequences, the
target exceeds the proxy model (GPT-2) in 398,385 cases (82.4%).
5. Defenses for Extractability
This section briefly discusses possible mitigations for
reducing extractability.
Training-Phase Defenses. Most previous works consider
the extraction boundary as the white-box surface and
thus focus on training-phase defenses, including (1) data-
processing, including deduplication [10] or sanitization [51,
52]; (2) privacy-preserving training, including incorporating
DP noise in optimization [12] and empirical defenses based
on regularization [53, 54]; and (3) post-training, which
introduces extra training stage for mitigating extractability
risk of the previous model, such as ParaPO [11]. Instruction-
tuned models [55] have also been found to reduce verbatim
generation [11].
Inference-Phase Defense. Extractability risk could be mit-
igated by restricting or limiting the API interface. For
example: (1) API access control, assuming queries can
be attributed to individuals, limiting maximum m serves
as a natural defense, as indicated by Figure 10 (Left). It
may also be possible to detect sequences of queries that
appear to be probe attempts, and rate-limit or block such
queries. (2) Decoding constraints, suppressing the sampling
probability [56] or interrupting when overlap is detected [9]
can directly reduce extractability. This can be combined
with limits on the available decoding parameters that can
be selected by users.
Evaluation and Discussion. We evaluate both potential em-
pirical mitigation strategies and differentially private training
in Figure 14. For empirical defense evaluation, we include
instruction-tuning (with the Tulu-3 [55] model tuned on
Llama-3.1-8B [47]) and a recently proposed post-training
ParaPO [11] (with direct preference optimization tuned on
the both Llama-3.1-8B and Tulu-3). We use their open-
released model checkpoints [11] and use the BookSum [49]
as the protected target set. For differentially-private training,
we fine-tune GPT-2 on Enron [46] with DP noise using
various privacy loss budgets.
Our observations are: (1) a combination of these empir-
ical training-phase defenses can amplify the extractability
mitigation. For example, compared to the original Llama
model, Tulu w/ ParaPO reduces the extractable portion given
b = 32 from 20% to 0.4%. (2) combining API access
control with both empirical and theoretical defenses further
suppresses extractability with minimal effort. For example,
when API limits are paired with Tulu tuned with ParaPO
only 0.03% of samples are found to be extractable. (3) DP
training can reduce the extraction ratio. However, varying œµ
does not lead to reductions across several orders of magni-

0
20
50
100
b
1
2
3
Ratio of Extraction Portion
(Member/Non-member)
GPT-2 Fine-tuned on Enron (m=20)
l=10
l=100
l=200
l=500
1
10
100
1000
b
10
3
10
2
10
1
Portion of Samples
Pile-CC (m=20, l=50)
Neo-125M
Neo-1.3B
Neo-2.7B
GPT2-S-124M
GPT2-M-355M
GPT2-L-774M
GPT2-XL-1.5B
Figure 13. Extraction difficulty of member and non-member data across sequence length l and model scale. (Left): Ratio of extraction portions (member/non-
member) in Enron at fixed b. (Right): Following [7], the Pile-CC dataset (not trained by GPT-2) is treated as the non-member split for GPT-2.
8B
Tulu-3-8B
8B
w/ ParaPO
Tulu-3-8B
w/ ParaPO
Llama-3.1 Models
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
Portion of Extraction
(b
32)
Post-Trained Model Comparison (l=50, BookSum)
m=1
m=20
|V|
1.0
3.0
8.0
20.0
Non-DP
Privacy Budget ( )
10
2
10
1
100
Portion of Extraction
(b
32)
GPT-2 Fine-tuned on Enron (l=50)
m=1
m=20
|V|
Figure 14. Defense Evaluation. (Up) combining instruction-tuning (Tulu-
3) with preference optimization (ParaPO) substantially mitigates risks.
(Bottom) DP training reduces extractability but shows limited gains under
small œµ, suggesting a gap between distinguishability defense and extraction.
tude, especially for shorter sequences such as l = 10 (see
Figure 20 in the Appendix). This reflects our Theorem 2
and highlights the need for future work to better understand
connections between training noise and effective extraction
defense.
6. Conclusion
We proved formally and demonstrated empirically that
extraction risk for API-served large language models is a
separate security objective that is not captured by classical
distinguishability games underlying DP-based defenses and
general inference privacy attacks. The reducibility chain
often implicitly assumed does not hold from interpreting
extraction risk with standard privacy tools; consequently,
low MIA advantage or a tight DP budget does not nec-
essarily ensure low extraction risk. To address this gap,
we formalized a worst-case extraction game and introduced
(l, b)-inextractability that upper bounds the expected num-
ber of trials required for verbatim suffix regeneration. Our
estimator accounts for prefix selection, optimal decoding
configuration, and multiple trials, yielding a conservative
per-sample bound that can be related to the magnitude
of realistic attack resources (queries, tokens, dollars, and
time). The framework provides a tight extraction risk esti-
mation for greedy generation, upper bounds for probabilistic
generation, and can be extended to untargeted goal and
approximate criterion, enabling unified auditing. Empirical
analyses across models reveal that vulnerable profiles are
distinct for MIA and data extraction and provide a guideline
for understanding the extraction cost.