Beyond Single-Agent Alignment: Preventing Context-Fragmented
Violations in Multi-Agent Systems
Jie Wu∗
Atlassian
Ming Gong
Atlassian
Abstract
As Large Language Model (LLM) agents proliferate across enterprise environments, agent
sprawl has created complex cross-departmental collaboration chains. We identify and formalize a
new security risk: Context-Fragmented Violations (CFVs)—a class of policy breaches where
individual agent actions appear locally safe and reasonable, yet collectively violate organizational
policies because critical policy facts are siloed in different departments’ private contexts.
Existing prompt-based alignment mechanisms and monolithic interceptors are poorly matched
to violations that span “contextual islands.” We propose Distributed Sentinel, a distributed
zero-trust enforcement architecture that introduces the Semantic Taint Token (STT) Proto-
col. Through lightweight sidecar proxies, our system propagates security state across organiza-
tional boundaries without exposing raw cross-domain data, enabling Counterfactual Graph
Simulation for cross-domain policy verification.
We construct PhantomEcosystem, a benchmark comprising 9 categories of realistic cross-
agent violation scenarios with adversarially balanced safe controls. On this benchmark, Dis-
tributed Sentinel achieves F1 = 0.95 with 106ms end-to-end latency (16ms verification +
90ms entity extraction on A100), compared to 0.85 F1 for prompt-based filtering and 0.65
for rule-based DLP. To empirically validate the need for external enforcement, we evaluate
eight frontier LLMs (GPT-5.4, GPT-4.1, Claude Opus 4.6, Gemini 2.5 Pro, and others) in
execution-oriented multi-agent workflows with per-agent domain world models. All models
exhibit substantial violation rates (14–98%), with cross-domain data flows showing systematically
higher violation rates than same-domain flows. These results indicate that self-avoidance is
unreliable and that multi-agent security benefits from a centralized enforcement layer operating
above individual agents.
1
Introduction
The rapid deployment of Large Language Model (LLM) agents in enterprise settings has fundamentally
transformed organizational workflows. From automated code review to customer service, from
financial analysis to marketing campaign generation, LLM agents now operate across virtually every
business function [Xi et al., 2023, Wang et al., 2024]. However, this proliferation has created an
emerging crisis that we term agent sprawl—the uncontrolled growth of autonomous agents operating
across organizational boundaries with minimal coordination.
1.1
The Core Tension: Commonsense vs. Organizational Context
Current AI safety research predominantly focuses on “universal alignment”—ensuring models refuse
to generate violent content, avoid leaking personal information, or abstain from harmful instruc-
tions [Ouyang et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2022]. While these efforts address general safety concerns,
∗jwu10@atlassian.com
1
arXiv:2604.22879v1 [cs.MA] 24 Apr 2026

they fundamentally miss a critical category of risks: violations defined by organization-specific
context.
Consider the following scenario, which we call the Project Titan Disaster:
Background: The R&D department is conducting a secret project “Titan” protected
under NDA.
R&D Agent: Generates an internal log stating “Fixed concurrency bug in Titan mod-
ule.” From the R&D agent’s perspective, synchronizing bug fixes internally is entirely
legitimate.
Marketing Agent: Receives this log and, following its directive to keep customers informed,
drafts a global customer update email highlighting recent improvements.
Failure Point: The LLM’s commonsense knowledge tells it that “fixing bugs” is positive
information worth sharing. However, it has no knowledge that “Titan” is a restricted
NDA codename that must never appear in external communications.
This example crystallizes a fundamental insight: security is no longer a question of model
intelligence, but of state synchronization. The marketing agent is not malicious, nor is it
“unaligned” in any traditional sense. It simply lacks access to a critical fact—that “Titan” carries
confidentiality constraints—because this fact exists only in the R&D department’s private context.
1.2
Context-Fragmented Violations: A New Threat Model
We introduce the concept of Context-Fragmented Violations (CFVs) to characterize this class
of security breaches. Formally, a CFV occurs when:
1. Local Legitimacy: Each individual agent action, evaluated against the acting agent’s local
knowledge graph, appears policy-compliant.
2. Global Violation: The collective action sequence, evaluated against a hypothetical omniscient
global view, violates organizational invariants.
CFVs are particularly insidious because they evade all existing defense mechanisms:
• Prompt-based guardrails fail because the violating agent genuinely believes its action is
safe—there is no malicious intent to detect.
• Monolithic interceptors fail because they lack access to the distributed policy facts needed
for accurate judgment.
• Human oversight fails at scale because the volume of cross-agent communications exceeds
human review capacity.
1.3
Semantic Laundering: The Persistence Problem
A related phenomenon we identify is Semantic Laundering—the gradual loss of security attributes
(“taint”) as information flows through multiple LLM nodes. When an LLM summarizes, paraphrases,
or translates content, the original security constraints attached to that content may be stripped
away, even if the semantic meaning is preserved.
For instance, if “Project Titan bug fix” is summarized as “recent stability improvements,” a
downstream agent may have no way to trace this innocuous phrase back to its NDA-protected origin.
This creates a fundamental challenge: security constraints must be attached to data provenance, not
to surface-level text.
2

1.4
Contributions
Our contributions are:
1. Problem Formalization: We formally define Context-Fragmented Violations and Semantic
Laundering as first-class security threats in multi-agent systems (§2).
2. PhantomEcosystem Benchmark: We construct a benchmark with 9 categories of CFV
scenarios, each with adversarially balanced safe controls, enabling rigorous evaluation of
cross-agent security systems (§3).
3. Distributed Sentinel Architecture: We propose a distributed enforcement architecture
featuring Semantic Taint Tokens (STT), sidecar-based interception, and cross-domain predicate
queries that preserve departmental data sovereignty (§4).
4. Empirical Validation: Distributed Sentinel achieves F1 = 0.95 on PhantomEcosystem
with 106ms end-to-end latency, substantially outperforming existing approaches (0.85 for
prompt-based filtering, 0.65 for rule-based DLP). Ablation studies confirm that each component
contributes meaningfully, with the system degrading to 0.53 F1 without STT propagation (§5).
5. Multi-Agent Violation Study: We evaluate eight frontier LLMs across three vendors
(OpenAI, Anthropic, Google) in execution-oriented multi-agent workflows with per-agent
domain world models. All models exhibit 14–98% violation rates, with cross-domain data flows
as the structural driver. This provides the first systematic empirical evidence that CFVs are a
real and pervasive threat requiring external enforcement (§5.9).
Our work establishes that multi-agent security can be reframed from a fuzzy language under-
standing problem to a deterministic distributed systems state consistency problem—a shift with
profound implications for industrial deployment of AI agents.
2
Problem Formalization
We now provide a rigorous mathematical framework for Context-Fragmented Violations and establish
the theoretical foundations for our solution.
2.1
System Model
We model an organization as a distributed collection of intelligent agents A = {A1, A2, . . . , An},
where each agent Ai operates within a specific organizational domain (e.g., R&D, Marketing, HR,
Finance).
Definition 2.1 (Local World Model). Each agent Ai maintains a private local knowledge graph
Gi = (Vi, Ei), where:
• Vi represents entities known to Ai (projects, employees, documents, etc.)
• Ei represents relationships and attributes (ownership, classification, permissions)
The local graphs are disjoint by default—agent Ai cannot directly access Gj for i ̸= j. This
reflects the reality of organizational silos where departments maintain separate knowledge bases,
access controls, and data governance policies.
3

Definition 2.2 (Global Graph). The hypothetical global graph GGlobal = Sn
i=1 Gi represents the
union of all local graphs. This graph is never fully materialized in our system but serves as a
theoretical construct for defining policy violations.
2.2
Policy Framework
Definition 2.3 (Policy Constraint). A policy constraint P is a predicate over graph states and
actions:
P : G × Action →{Allow, Block}
(1)
Definition 2.4 (Invariant). An organizational invariant I is a property that must hold across the
global graph at all times. Invariants encode high-level security requirements such as:
• “NDA-protected entities must not appear in external communications”
• “Personal salary information must not be accessible to non-HR agents”
• “Deprecated API endpoints must not be recommended to customers”
2.3
Context-Fragmented Violations: Formal Definition
Definition 2.5 (Context-Fragmented Violation). A cross-agent action sequence S = ⟨a1, a2, . . . , am⟩
constitutes a Context-Fragmented Violation if and only if:
Condition 1 (Local Legitimacy): For each action ak ∈S executed by agent Ai:
Verify(ak, Gi) = Allow
(2)
That is, every action passes the local policy check when evaluated against the executing agent’s
private knowledge graph.
Condition 2 (Global Violation): When evaluated against the global graph:
Verify(S, GGlobal) = Block
(3)
The action sequence violates at least one organizational invariant I when the full context is available.
Theorem 2.6 (Fundamental Limitation of Local Enforcement). For any CFV S, there exists no
local enforcement mechanism Ei operating solely on Gi that can reliably detect the violation without
additional cross-domain information.
Proof. We construct an indistinguishability argument. Consider a CFV S = ⟨a1, . . . , am⟩where
ak is executed by Ai. By Definition 2.5 (Condition 1), Verify(ak, Gi) = Allow. Now consider
a hypothetical safe action sequence S′ that is identical to S from Ai’s perspective (i.e., produces
the same local observations in Gi) but does not violate global invariants. Since Ei has access only
to Gi, it cannot distinguish S from S′, and therefore cannot reliably detect the violation without
information from Gj (j ̸= i).
2.4
Semantic Laundering: Formal Definition
Definition 2.7 (Taint). A taint τ is a security attribute attached to an entity v ∈Vi, representing
constraints on how information derived from v may be used. We denote the taint set of entity v as
T (v).
4

Definition 2.8 (Semantic Laundering). Let ϕ : T ext →T ext be an LLM transformation (summa-
rization, paraphrasing, translation). Semantic laundering occurs when:
T (ϕ(t)) ⊂T (t)
(4)
That is, the transformation strictly reduces the taint set, causing security constraints to be “washed
away” despite semantic content being preserved.
Example 2.9 (Laundering Chain). Consider the transformation sequence:
t0 = “Fixed critical bug in Project Titan authentication”
t1 = ϕ1(t0) = “Resolved authentication issue in flagship project”
t2 = ϕ2(t1) = “Improved login security”
If taint tracking relies on keyword matching, T (t2) may be empty while T (t0) contained NDA:Titan.
2.5
Design Requirements
Based on our formal analysis, we derive the following requirements for an effective defense mechanism:
1. Cross-Domain Visibility: The system must enable policy decisions that incorporate facts
from multiple organizational silos.
2. Data Sovereignty: Departments must not be required to expose their private knowledge
graphs to other departments or a central authority.
3. Laundering Resistance: Security constraints must propagate based on data provenance, not
surface-level text analysis.
4. Low Latency: Enforcement overhead must be minimal to avoid disrupting agent workflows.
5. Monotonic Composition: If an action is blocked by the union of local checks, it must also
be blocked by the global check (and vice versa for critical invariants).
Theorem 2.10 (Monotonicity of Constraint Propagation). Let I1, I2, . . . , Ik be invariants enforced
across agents A1, A2, . . . , Ak. If each Ii is monotone (adding more facts to a graph cannot turn a
Block decision into Allow), then:
(a) Soundness of local blocks: If any local invariant blocks, the global check also blocks:
∃i : Ii(Gi, a) = Block =⇒Ii(GGlobal, a) = Block
(5)
(b) Completeness of distributed checks: If every security-relevant constraint resides in at
least one Gi, then for any action a:
IGlobal(GGlobal, a) = Block =⇒∃i : Ii(Gi, a) = Block
(6)
Proof. Part (a): Since Gi ⊆GGlobal, any blocking constraint c witnessed in Gi is also present in
GGlobal. By monotonicity, the addition of facts from other Gj cannot override c, so Ii(GGlobal, a) =
Block.
Part (b): If IGlobal(GGlobal, a) = Block, there exists a constraint c in GGlobal witnessing the
violation. By assumption, c resides in some Gi. Since Gi ⊆GGlobal and c ∈Gi, evaluating Ii on
Gi with the same action a also yields Block (the constraint c and the violating action a are both
present).
5

Corollary 2.11 (Completeness of Distributed Enforcement). If every security-relevant constraint
is represented in at least one local graph Gi, and the STT protocol ensures all relevant taints are
propagated to the enforcing sidecar, then the distributed enforcement system detects all violations
that would be detected by a centralized system with access to GGlobal.
Proof Sketch. Follows directly from Theorem 2.10(b) combined with Theorem 2.12. Part (b) ensures
that any global violation is witnessed in some local graph Gi. The STT protocol ensures that
the enforcing sidecar receives the taint from Gi, triggering a cross-domain query that surfaces the
blocking constraint.
Assumption Discussion.
The requirement that every security constraint resides in at least one Gi
is strong but realistically achievable in practice: it corresponds to the assumption that organizational
policies are codified in departmental knowledge graphs. Constraints that exist only in unstructured
documents or tacit human knowledge fall outside our model and represent a limitation (see §7).
Theorem 2.12 (STT Propagation Correctness). Let τ(d) denote the true taint set of data d. Assume
taints are attached to data provenance (source graph nodes) rather than surface-level text. For any
LLM transformation ϕ and STT propagation function π:
π(τ(d)) ⊇τ(ϕ(d))
(7)
That is, the propagated taint is a conservative over-approximation—it may over-estimate but never
under-estimate the true security constraints.
Proof. The key design choice is that STT taints track provenance (which source graph nodes
contributed to the data), not content (what the text says). An LLM transformation ϕ may alter
surface text—e.g., summarizing “Project Titan bug fix” into “stability improvements”—but cannot
change the provenance: the output still derives from the same source nodes. Since π preserves all
source-node taints and uses the Most-Restrictive union merge strategy:
π(τ1, τ2) = τ1 ∪τ2
(8)
no constraint can be lost during propagation. The only case where π(τ(d)) ⊃τ(ϕ(d)) is when ϕ
genuinely removes the semantic dependency on a source (e.g., the output is completely unrelated
to the input), in which case over-estimation is safe—it may lead to false blocks but never missed
violations.
This theorem establishes that provenance-based taint tracking is resistant to semantic laundering,
unlike content-based approaches that can be defeated by paraphrasing.
3
PhantomEcosystem Benchmark
We construct PhantomEcosystem, a benchmark designed to stress-test detection of Context-
Fragmented Violations in cross-agent security systems.
3.1
Design Principles
PhantomEcosystem is built on three core principles:
6

No Explicit Labels.
Communication content must not contain explicit markers such as “Confi-
dential,” “Restricted,” or “Internal Only.” This forces systems to rely on graph-based state rather
than surface-level keyword detection. Real-world sensitive information rarely comes with convenient
labels.
Adversarial Balance.
Every violating case is paired with a visually similar safe control case. This
tests the system’s precision—can it distinguish between “discussing Project Titan with a teammate”
(safe) and “discussing Project Titan in a customer email” (violation)?
Realistic Organizational Structure.
Scenarios reflect genuine enterprise structures with R&D,
Marketing, HR, Sales, Legal, and Finance departments, each with realistic knowledge graphs and
inter-departmental communication patterns.
3.2
Violation Categories
PhantomEcosystem comprises nine categories of Context-Fragmented Violations, spanning direct
exfiltration, compositional inference, and workflow-level laundering or bypass behaviors.
Table 1: PhantomEcosystem Violation Categories
Category
Description
Representative Flow
Direct Leak
Sensitive data sent to unauthorized
external destination
HR →external storage
Multi-hop
Data laundered through intermedi-
ate agents or tools
agents →multiple hops
Aggregation
Individually safe fields combine
into sensitive conclusions
analytics →sales/HR
Time-series
Temporal patterns reveal strategic
or restricted state
logs →downstream report-
ing
Side-channel
Restricted info inferred from meta-
data or behavior
external →internal signal
Scope creep
Initially legitimate workflows ex-
pand beyond authorized use
finance →operations
Data reconstr.
Partial fragments combine to re-
construct a secret
sources →complete secret
Cross-org
Internal data crosses organiza-
tional boundaries
R&D
→
part-
ner/competitor
Token manip.
Forged or altered credentials ex-
pand access scope
any actor →privileged re-
source
At a high level, these categories fall into three families. Boundary-crossing attacks cover
explicit exfiltration events such as direct leak and cross-org, where the main challenge is that local
agents lack awareness of external disclosure constraints. Compositional inference attacks cover
aggregation, time-series, side-channel, and data reconstruction, where no single message appears
overtly harmful, yet the joint effect of multiple signals violates policy. Workflow and control-path
attacks cover multi-hop, scope creep, and token manipulation, where the violation emerges through
delegation structure, tool chaining, or access-surface abuse rather than any one obviously forbidden
act.
This grouped taxonomy serves two purposes. First, it ensures coverage across the main structural
failure modes that arise when policy-relevant facts are fragmented across agents, tools, and time.
7

Second, it allows us to evaluate whether a defense generalizes beyond a single archetype such as direct
exfiltration. Detailed scenario construction and representative examples are deferred to Appendix B.
Dataset Statistics.
PhantomEcosystem contains 200 scenarios: 160 attack cases and 40 legitimate
controls, spanning 9 attack categories, 17 agent types, and average communication chains of length
2.4. Difficulty is balanced across easy/medium/hard settings (62/84/54). Most attack categories
contain 20 cases; cross-org and token manipulation contain 10 each because they require more
specialized setup. Table 2 summarizes the resulting distribution.
Table 2: Attack Distribution by Category
Category
N
Representative Scenarios
Direct Leak
20
HR data to personal cloud; customer lists copied
to shadow tools
Multi-hop
20
Restricted information laundered through 2–3
agent hops
Aggregation
20
Partial attributes combined for re-identification
Time-series
20
Temporal traces revealing strategic decisions
Side-channel
20
Metadata- or behavior-based inference attacks
Scope creep
20
Initially legitimate workflows that gradually ex-
pand in scope
Data reconstr.
20
Partial fragments combined to recover a secret
Cross-org
10
Data sent to partner or competitor endpoints
Token manip.
10
Forged or altered access token bypass
Evaluation Metrics.
We report precision, recall, and F1 for violation detection; latency from
action initiation to enforcement decision; and privacy exposure in terms of what cross-domain
information is revealed during verification.
4
Methodology
Distributed Sentinel is a distributed zero-trust enforcement architecture that detects and
prevents Context-Fragmented Violations while preserving departmental data sovereignty.
4.1
Architecture Overview
Distributed Sentinel employs a sidecar-based architecture inspired by service mesh patterns [Link-
erd, 2020]. Each agent Ai is paired with a Sentinel Sidecar Si that intercepts all incoming and
outgoing communications, including messages and tool calls.
4.2
Semantic Taint Token (STT) Protocol
The core innovation of Distributed Sentinel is the Semantic Taint Token (STT) protocol,
which enables security state propagation without data exposure.
4.2.1
Token Structure
When agent Ai sends a message m to agent Aj, the sidecar Si computes and attaches an encrypted
STT:
8

Agent A1
Sidecar S1
Map | Check
G1
Local KG
Agent A2
Sidecar S2
Map | Check
G2
Local KG
· · ·
· · ·
· · ·
Agent An
Sidecar Sn
Map | Check
Gn
Local KG
Domain 1
Domain 2
Domain n
intercept
intercept
STT
STT
query src
True/False
BLOCKED
Figure 1: Distributed Sentinel architecture. Each domain contains an agent, sidecar, and local
knowledge graph—forming isolated contextual islands. Sidecars perform local entity mapping and
policy checking; cross-domain verification queries the STT source directly, returning only boolean
results (True/False) to preserve data sovereignty. This boolean transparency ensures no raw data
crosses domain boundaries.
STT = ⟨src_id, taint_vec, constraints, sig⟩
(9)
where:
• src_id: Unique identifier of the source node in Gi
• taint_vec: Bit vector encoding active security labels
• constraints: Serialized policy predicates (e.g., audience ̸= External)
• sig: Cryptographic signature preventing tampering
4.2.2
Lazy Materialization
Critically, the STT does not carry the full graph structure—only opaque references (“pointers”) to
source nodes. This design ensures:
1. Lightweight transmission: STT overhead is O(1) regardless of graph size.
2. Privacy preservation: The receiving sidecar cannot infer the source graph’s structure.
3. Tamper resistance: The signature prevents malicious modification of security claims.
4.3
Cross-Domain Predicate Query
When agent Aj prepares to execute a sensitive action (e.g., send_email), the sidecar Sj initiates a
cross-domain verification:
Privacy-Preserving Responses.
The source sidecar Si responds only with boolean results
(True/False), never exposing the underlying graph structure or entity details. For example:
Query: “Does entity node_42 permit audience=External?”
Response: False
9

Algorithm 1 Cross-Domain Predicate Query
Require: Action a, received STT tokens T , local graph Gj
Ensure: Decision ∈{Allow, Block}
1: scope ←extract_target_scope(a) {e.g., External, Internal}
2: for each token ∈T do
3:
query ←build_predicate(token.src_id, scope)
4:
result ←remote_query(token.src_sidecar, query)
5:
if result = False then
6:
return Block
7:
end if
8: end for
9: return Allow
The querying sidecar learns only that the action is prohibited, not why (e.g., that node_42
represents an NDA-protected project).
4.4
Neuro-Symbolic Entity Mapping
A critical challenge is translating free-form agent communication into graph entities that can be
checked by the symbolic policy engine. We therefore treat entity grounding as the neuro-symbolic
interface between language-space interactions and policy-checkable system state, and define a
Neuro-Symbolic Mapping Function:
f : T ext × Gi →2Vi
(10)
This function takes text and a knowledge graph, returning the set of entities referenced.
4.4.1
Implementation
In our implementation, f is instantiated by a lightweight grounding layer that combines LLM-based
semantic interpretation with graph-constrained resolution. Concretely, the mapper performs:
1. Named Entity Recognition (NER): Identify entity mentions in text.
2. Session Provenance Alignment: Leverage conversation history to resolve ambiguous