VRSafe: A Secure Virtual Keyboard to Mitigate Keystroke
Inference in Virtual Reality∗
Yijun Yuan
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
yiy95@pitt.edu
Na Du
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
na.du@pitt.edu
Adam J. Lee
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
adamlee@pitt.edu
Balaji Palanisamy
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
bpalan@pitt.edu
Abstract
Password-based authentication is one of the most commonly used
methods for verifying user identities, and its widespread usage
continues in virtual reality (VR) applications. As a result, various
forms of attacks on password-based authentication in traditional
environments such as keystroke inference and shoulder surfing, are
still effective in VR applications. While keystroke inference attacks
on virtual keyboards have been studied extensively, few efforts
have developed an effective and cost-efficient defense strategy to
mitigate keystroke inferences in VR. To address this gap, this paper
presents a novel QWERTY keyboard called VRSafe that is resilient
to keystroke inference attacks. The proposed keyboard carefully
introduces false positive keystrokes into the information collected
by attackers during the typing process, making the inference of
the original password difficult. VRSafe also incorporates a novel
malicious login detector that can effectively identify unauthorized
login attempts using credentials inferred from keystroke inference
attacks with high detection rate and minimal time and memory
cost. The proposed design is evaluated through both simulation
experiments and a real-world user study, and the results show that
VRSafe can significantly reduce the accuracy of keystroke infer-
ence attacks while incurring a modest overhead from a usability
standpoint.
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →Virtual reality; User studies;
Keyboards; Text input; • Security and privacy →Authentica-
tion.
Keywords
VR Security; Password-based Authentication; Keystroke Inference
Attack Defense
1
Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) devices and applications are becoming increas-
ingly prevalent. Studies show that over 171 million people globally
use VR [18], and nearly 88% of VR users use their devices multiple
times in a month [13]. VR applications provide immersive expe-
riences not only in gaming and entertainment, but also in many
other domains including education, fitness, healthcare and engi-
neering [13]. The widespread use of VR leads to increased exchange
of sensitive information (e.g. passwords), making them attractive
targets for adversaries.
Password-based authentication stands out as the most commonly
used authentication method to date, however, extensive prior work
∗Accepted at ACM CODASPY 2026
has shown its vulnerability to keystroke inference attacks and shoul-
der surfing across various settings [8, 14, 38, 44, 51, 56]. With the
growing adoption of VR devices, these risks become more severe.
VR applications provide a rich immersive experience to the user,
enabling more stealthy attacks as users are generally less aware of
their physical surroundings when using the VR devices. Many infer-
ence attacks only require placing an inconspicuous sensor (e.g. cam-
era) and achieve high inference accuracy [2, 12, 19, 23, 40, 55, 58, 60].
These threat models exploit various information such as user’s hand
movement [12], gyroscope data [40], wifi-signal data [2] or acoustic
signals [23]. Such attacks are highly practical in the real world as
they incur low cost and require minimal use of specialized knowl-
edge. Prior efforts have also explored biometric-based approaches
as an alternative to password-based authentication [5, 24, 39, 42]
such as using eye-tracking cameras to capture iris information in
VR headsets [5, 24]. Although biometric approaches have better
resistance against keystroke inference attacks, they have not gained
wide acceptance among the users. This is in part due to the lack of
mature regulations and laws on how to store highly unique biomet-
ric data, as well as due to OS and hardware compatibility issues [43]
across different commercial VR products.
In existing threat models, the risk of full password inference is
underestimated. Though existing keystroke inference attacks can
achieve high character-level guessing accuracy (often exceeding
95%) [58], inferring a full password string is significantly more
challenging due to the absence of inter-word context and limited
intra-word semantics compared to inferring words in natural lan-
guage texts (e.g. email content). While simple typographic correc-
tion tools [55] may yield reasonable improvements for general text
inference, such tools offer little benefit for reconstructing pass-
words. Designing or evaluating defense mechanisms based on such
a threat model can lead to overly optimistic conclusions, as these
methods fail to capture the strategies that a practical adversary
would adopt. To build a more robust and practical defense, in this
work, we adopt a stronger threat model in which the attacker in-
tegrates advanced password guessing techniques [35, 36, 50, 57]
into the inference process, rather than relying on simple correction
tools.
Although there have been many research efforts on studying
keystroke inference attacks in VR environments, countermeasures
on this topic have not received adequate attention yet. Some studies
briefly discuss ideas for potential defenses [58], others have pro-
posed and evaluated defense solutions based on obfuscating user
inputs using randomized keyboard layouts [26] or by repositioning
the UI components [47]. However, such techniques increase the
usage difficulty and impose additional physical and cognitive loads
to the user.
arXiv:2604.21001v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

There are several challenges involved in building an effective
countermeasure against keystroke inference attacks. First, many
attack models can reliably detect the precise moments when keys
are pressed (e.g. [12, 19, 40, 58]). A strong defense method should
therefore remain effective even under such worst cases, where the
adversary can perfectly identify every key press event made by the
user. Second, when an attacker attempts to log in with an incorrect
but closely matching password, it is inherently difficult to detect the
source of the password leakage. A comprehensive countermeasure
may detect such malicious login attempts in addition to mitigating
them. Finally, maintaining a high level of usability in the defense
solution design remains a critical challenge.
In this paper, we propose VRSafe, a security solution designed to
enhance the security of password inputs entered through a standard
QWERTY keyboard in virtual reality. The proposed approach care-
fully injects fabricated noise into the typing process, making the
inference of the original password harder for the attacker. VRSafe
also incorporates a novel detection mechanism to identify whether
an incorrect login attempt is a direct result of a keystroke inference
attack. To the best of our knowledge, VRSafe is the first approach
to alert the user when an attacker attempts to login using their
inferred keystroke information. Our evaluation using public leaked
password datasets and an IRB-approved user study demonstrates
that VRSafe is a secure, practical and user-friendly approach for
individuals with higher security and privacy needs in VR environ-
ments.
2
Background and Related Work
In this section, we discuss the existing works on keystroke inference
attack and defense in VR.
Keystroke inference attack, as the name suggests, tries to re-
construct the user’s input sequence on the keyboard through side-
channel information emanated from typing (e.g. sound, motion).
Over the past decade, keystroke inference attack has been widely in-
vestigated, prompting the use of many different techniques to lever-
age these side-channel signals. Recent work [12, 21, 58] have demon-
strated the feasibility of reconstructing sensitive texts through ana-
lyzing hand movements captured by videos, highlighting the crit-
ical need for enhanced privacy and security protection. It is also
possible to use the hand tracker camera of an Augmented Real-
ity Head-Mounted Display (AR-HMD) [32] to recover passwords
similar to the video-based attack in the VR environment. Wang
et al. [52] find that gaze motions observed in videos can also leak
typing sequence information. In addition to video-based attacks,
attacks that exploit other channels such as audio, radio frequency
(RF) or infrared signals generated during typing also pose serious
threats. VRecKey [34] discloses an attack in which Infrared Remote
(IR) signals emitted from VR controllers can be represented in heat
map to reveal controller positions during typing in order to infer
keystroke information. The attack presented in [2] uses Channel
State Information (CSI) of Wifi signals from routers placed near the
victim. The information exhibits unique patterns as users move the
controller to type different keys, helping the attacker to identify
the keystrokes. Another class of attacks uses the acoustic signals
emitted by the VR devices. Heimdall [23] captures subtle variance
in acoustic information created by the controller in different key po-
sitions using their customized directional microphone. Prior works
have also shown that attackers can utilize Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU) data such as combination of position, orientation and
velocity [22, 40, 55] or memory usage in the victim’s device [60] to
perform keystroke inference.
In contrast to the widespread prior efforts in developing var-
ious attacks, models to mitigate or to prevent inference attacks
in VR environments are much less explored. In practice, very few
methods can balance ease of use with strong performance in de-
fending against the inference attacks. The defense solution outlined
in [58] suggests placing physical screens to block the external line
of sight. The approach presented in [3] replaces the normal 2D
QWERTY keyboard with a curved, arc-shaped layout in AR to in-
troduce variation in key spacing. Another approach to safeguard
against keystroke inference attacks is to introduce randomness.
For instance, the solution presented in [27] proposes projecting a
random layout keyboard, and [20] generates a random mapping
between alphabets and keypad keys to secure password entry in
smart wearable glasses. The authors in [47] propose repositioning
the UI components (e.g. cursor, keyboard) after each click so that
an adversary cannot reliably map observed movements to specific
keys.
Overall, current solutions often adopt radical changes to the
conventional keyboard layouts or input designs, and some rely
on extra external protection devices. Such approaches introduce
substantial learning overhead and increase the difficulty of use for
end users. In contrast, the research presented in this paper aims
to fill this gap by developing a usable and secure VR keyboard
architecture that can withstand video-based keystroke inference
attacks and yet provide a highly usable VR experience to the user.
3
VRSafe Design
In this section, we present VRSafe, a secure keyboard in virtual
reality that provides word-level protection for user password input
against keystroke inference attacks. We first introduce the threat
model used in the design of VRSafe and then describe the strategies
employed for achieving better security and balancing the overhead
incurred while using the keyboard. Finally we present our proposed
mechanism for detecting malicious login attempts using credentials
stolen through keystroke inference attacks.
3.1
Threat Model
3.1.1
Keystroke Inference. Keystroke inference threat models can
employ a range of sensors, each with its own tolerance to noise.
Video-based attacks often use ordinary digital cameras with no
special configuration [12, 21, 22, 58], and videos are generally more
robust to noise. To ensure reproducibility and fair performance
comparisons with prior work, we adopt a video-based attack in our
study. Specifically, we follow the attack model proposed in [12],
where the adversary captures the VR user’s hand movements with
a camera placed in the surrounding environment. We believe such a
threat model is quite practical and is within the capabilities of most
real world adversaries. In this model [12], the victim is assumed to
interact with the keyboard using hand tracking features provided
by VR headsets for typing. The captured video frames are processed

using the hand landmark detection framework in MediaPipe [59]
to extract coordinates of hand joints. By leveraging unique joint
patterns exhibited during typing, such as relative joint positions
and velocities, the model infers both the spatial position of the
virtual keyboard plane and the final keystroke predictions. To better
model the attacker’s ability, we make three more assumptions, each
with a brief rationale: (i) The attacker can correctly identify every
keystroke in the corresponding video clips. While raw video data
may include false positives and false negatives, techniques like
denoising and clustering can significantly reduce such detection
errors, leading to a high true positive detection rate. (ii) The attacker
can access any publicly available information within the application,
but does not have access to private data of the legitimate user.
Public data like keyboard layouts and language preference are easily
obtainable, whereas private data such as screen display content are
protected and inaccessible without privileged permissions. (iii) We
also assume that the attacker is allowed at most 𝑘guessing attempts.
This is consistent with most web applications, which allow only a
small number of password guesses to be made before the system
locks the user for suspicious action.
3.1.2
Password Guessing Refinement. Although existing keystroke
inference attacks can achieve high character-level accuracy, end-
to-end word guessing accuracy still has significant room for im-
provement. Prior work has used simple typo correction tools such
as grammar and spelling correction in Google Doc [55] on texts
reconstructed from keystrokes, which underestimates the capabili-
ties of real world attackers. In contrast, we find that using targeted
password guessing models can improve the full password guessing
accuracy, providing a more realistic assessment of defense effective-
ness. Particularly, Pal et al. [36] proposed a sequence to sequence
(seq2seq) targeted password guessing model using recurrent neural
network (RNN) which is trained on users’ leaked passwords from a
breached site to guess their passwords on another uncompromised
site. Wang et al. [50] introduced Pass2Edit, which further improves
this idea and currently achieves state-of-the-art performance. By
inputting passwords inferred from keystrokes into such models,
one can generate a list of plausible passwords, and one of which
could correspond to the actual password.
3.2
Design Overview
VRSafe consists of two modules, Keystroke Noise Injection Key-
board and Inference Attack Detector, as shown in Figure 1. Users
interact with VRSafe keyboard in a way similar to normal virtual
keyboards, with only a small number of additional actions that in-
tentionally introduce noise into the user’s password input. VRSafe
can differentiate the noise from the actual password, maintaining
the original password unchanged while storing a "noisy" version of
the password. Upon clicking the login button, both the original and
"noisy" password will be sent to the server. The server verifies the
original password against the stored credentials in the database and
only if the verification succeeds, it adds the corresponding “noisy”
password to the detector. The shaded region in Figure 1 represents
a keystroke inference attacker who covertly places a camera to
record the user’s interactions with the VR headset, including the
additional actions required by VRSafe. Based on these recordings,
the attacker attempts to infer keystrokes and launch a malicious
login attempt. However, the attacker can only recover the “noisy”
password from the recorded video, and any such login attempts
using the “noisy” passwords will be detected by the server.
Noise Injection 
Keyboard
Credential
Database
Ghost Password
(dKsjhXf*lq13)
1 0
0 0
1 1
0 0
…
Password
(dKsjhflq13)
Detector (Bloom Filter)
…
1 0
1 0
1 1
0 1
VR User
Malicious
Recording
Video Frames
Generate
Guesses
Identify
Keystrokes
Guess-1: DKsjhXf*lq13
Guess-2: dKsjhXf*lq13!
…
Guess-k: dKsjhXf*lq13
Server
Keystroke 
Inference Attack 
Detected!
4
2
1
3
Figure 1: VRSafe architecture. (1) Normal user interacts with
VRSafe keyboard, the original password should remain un-
changed for successful authentication and "noisy" password
will be forwarded to detector. (2) Server adds the "noisy" pass-
word to detector if the original password matches the record
in database(i.e. a legitimate login). (3) A keystroke inference
attacker captures the user’s keystroke on VRSafe keyboard
and attempts to login. (4) The detector raises an alarm if cre-
dential exists in the detector.
3.3
Keystroke Noise Injection in VR Keyboard
We first explain the design rationale behind our approach of inject-
ing fabricated noise to mitigate keystroke inference attacks and
present the technical details of our design. The keystroke noise
injection in VRSafe is based on insights from recent work demon-
strating that even for attack models with high accuracy [58], certain
behaviors significantly affect the accuracy: a participant pressing
down towards a key, hesitating and then retracting the finger(s)
before hitting, can lead to large amounts of false positive keystrokes.
Drawing insights from this observation, we explore this phenome-
non and propose our keystroke noise injection mechanism. Instead
of accidentally "false pressing a key" or asking users to type some-
thing wrong occasionally [56], VRSafe leverages an adaptive mech-
anism that prompts the user to insert fabricated characters (noise)
based on the current input string and previously injected noise. An
attacker observing the hand movements of the VR user will not
be able to differentiate the true intended inputs from fabricated
ones, resulting in incorrect password inference. From a password
protection standpoint, this process can be viewed as generating
an augmented password 𝑆′ derived from the original password 𝑆.
There is a constraint in this process: 𝑆must be a subsequence
of 𝑆′, otherwise we will lose content in the original password. At
the same time, the key press signals triggered by fabricated char-
acters are processed differently and will not be forwarded to the
keyboard output function (Fig. 2). This ensures the integrity of
the normal login process. We refer to the characters that exist in
user’s original/real password as real characters, the additional
fabricated characters prompted by VRSafe as ghost characters and
the augmented password as ghost password.

Key Press
Textbox Output
Keyboard
Update
Ghost Character?
Yes
No
Ghost Character 
Generator
Current String: dKsjhflq13
Probability of Inject Ghost 
Character: 70%
User
Figure 2: VRSafe will maintain a state variable to indicate
whether the input is a ghost character or a real character, and
only real characters will be forwarded to the textbox.
Ghost Password Generation. Many models such as RNN-based
seq2seq model [45], transformer based LLM models [1, 46] are
capable of generating a similar password sequence based on a given
password. However, they are inadequate for this task as they cannot
guarantee the subsequence constraint (i.e. original password 𝑆is a
subsequence of ghost password𝑆′) is satisfied on every input/output
pair. To address this limitation, we need to employ a method that
can reliably embed the characters of the original password into the
ghost password. In VRSafe, we adopt a pointer-based method with
two actions: (i) copy action, which appends the current pointed
character in the original password to ghost password, and (ii) inject
action, which appends a random ghost character. By progressing the
pointer from the first to the last character of the original password,
this approach ensures that the subsequence constraint is always
satisfied. To decide between the two actions, we model the process
as a finite sequence of Bernoulli trials: with probability 𝑃, the model
performs an inject action and with a probability 1 −𝑃, it performs
a copy action. Furthermore, to prevent the ghost password from
becoming excessively long or identical to the original password,
we impose a maximum limit on the number of consecutive ghost
characters and a minimum requirement on the total number of
injected ghost characters.
Like words in natural languages, many passwords also contain
semantics, especially in human-chosen passwords. If we inject a
ghost character into an improper position, the adversary can easily
spot the ghost character and remove it. Conversely, if a password
already has a high entropy, adding many ghost characters provides
little additional benefit. Therefore, the ghost password generation
process should dynamically choose which action to take based on
the current context. To address this, we train a small RNN-based
model as a meter to evaluate the "randomness" of the current string,
and adjust the injection probability 𝑃accordingly. The model con-
sists of a single-layer Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) with a hidden
size of 64, and input tokens are represented with embeddings dimen-
sion of 16. The GRU output is then fed into a fully connected (FC)
layer and the final output is passed through a sigmoid activation
to return a value between 0 and 1. For training, we use a publicly
leaked dataset, namely Compilation of Many Breaches (COMB)
dataset [37]. We label passwords from publicly leaked password
dataset with 0 and machine generated passwords with 1. We note
that not all passwords in public leaked dataset are human-chosen,
but there is no consensus on how to reliably distinguish them, since
passwords do not have "correct spelling" or linguistic rules like
natural language words. Nevertheless, leaked password datasets
remain the most representative and widely used source of human
created passwords, making them a reasonable choice for approx-
imating the human-chosen class in this case. To exclude extreme
outliers, we remove passwords that exceed 30 characters or only
contain hexadecimal characters, since they are more likely to be
hashes than passwords. The ghost password generation algorithm
(Algorithm 1) starts with an initial injection probability 𝑝0. After
each action, the current ghost password will be forwarded to the
meter model, the return value will be smoothed through exponen-
tial moving average (EMA) and compared with randomness level
𝑟. If it is smaller than 𝑟, meaning that the current string is not ad-
equately random, then 𝑝will increase Δ𝑝, otherwise 𝑝becomes
smaller.
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Ghost Character Injection
Require: smoothing factor 𝛼, randomness level 𝑟, injection proba-
bility 𝑝0, step size Δ𝑝, password 𝑝𝑤𝑑
1: Initialize 𝑝←𝑝0, 𝑟EMA ←𝑟, ghost_pwd ←””, 𝑝𝑜𝑠= 0
2: while 𝑝𝑜𝑠< len(𝑝𝑤𝑑) do
3:
if random() < 𝑝then
4:
Inject(ghost_pwd)
5:
else
6:
Copy(ghost_pwd, pwd, pos)
7:
𝑝𝑜𝑠←𝑝𝑜𝑠+ 1
⊲moves forward to next character
8:
end if
9:
ˆ𝑟←Eval(ghost_pwd)
⊲Evaluate randomness of current
string with meter model.
10:
𝑟EMA ←(1 −𝛼) · 𝑟EMA + 𝛼· ˆ𝑟
11:
if 𝑟EMA < 𝑟then
12:
𝑝←𝑝+ Δ𝑝
13:
else
14:
𝑝←𝑝−Δ𝑝
15:
end if
16: end while
17: return ghost_pwd
Choosing Ghost Characters. We further elaborate the noise in-
jection process (Inject() in Algorithm 1) in the generation of ghost
passwords. A straightforward baseline approach is to uniformly
choose a ghost character from an alphabet set of all legal charac-
ters. However, a selection based on uniform distribution remains
vulnerable to simple human inspection. For instance, suppose that
the original password contains a date of birth, and if an alphabetic
letter is added as a ghost character in between, then the attacker
can easily exclude this letter from the inferred text. In order to make
the ghost character look similar to a real character, we select ghost
characters using simple language models that can capture linguistic
connections between characters to make the process context-aware.
Unlike neural networks that often require significant computational
resources and introduce additional latency, the Markov model offers
a lightweight and efficient alternative for ghost character selection.
By definition, a 𝑘-order Markov model assigns a probability distri-
bution over the next character conditioned only on the preceding
𝑘characters:

𝑃(𝑥𝑖| 𝑥𝑖−1,𝑥𝑖−2, . . . ,𝑥1) = 𝑃(𝑥𝑖| 𝑥𝑖−1,𝑥𝑖−2, . . . ,𝑥𝑖−𝑘)
=
count(𝑥𝑖−𝑘,𝑥𝑖−𝑘+1, . . . ,𝑥𝑖)
Í
𝑐∈Σ count(𝑥𝑖−𝑘,𝑥𝑖−𝑘+1, . . . ,𝑥𝑖−1,𝑐)
where 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡(𝑥𝑖−1,𝑥𝑖) refers to the number of occurrences of string
𝑥𝑖−1𝑥𝑖in a given dataset. We test the Markov model using the
configuration used in [25] with different orders and find that the
3-order Markov does not incur any noticeable delay in the ghost
character generation process and yet provides sufficient context-
awareness and randomness.
Implementation. The keyboard in VRSafe is built using Unity
based on a publicly available QWERTY keyboard template from
the MRTK toolkit by Microsoft[33]. While entering the password, if
the next character is a ghost character, the keyboard will disable all
other keys on the keyboard except the ghost character and notify
the user via text prompts, ensuring the user’s next action injects
the intended noise. After typing the ghost character, the keyboard
layout will be restored to normal QWERTY and the user can con-
tinue typing. In a normal keyboard, every key fired by the user click
will be appended to the textbox. We add a private variable to track
whether each character is a real or a ghost character, and only real
characters are forwarded to the text output. The ghost password
is stored alongside the real password in the textbox GameObject,
ensuring that it persists even if the keyboard is closed. We also
create a login interface together with the VRSafe keyboard as a VR
application using Unity 2022.3.24f1 and deploy it on Meta Quest2
for the user study. The screenshot of the application is shown in
Figure 3.
VRSafe
Ghost Character(Highlighted)
Simulated Login Page
Other Keys(Disabled)
Tracked Hand
*For user study
Figure 3: A screenshot when the user needs to type a ghost
character. All other keys except the ghost character will be
disabled, and the user will be notified via text prompts.
Overhead. Ghost characters enhance the security of the original
password, however, they also incur longer text entry time. There-
fore, it is critical to carefully consider the overhead introduced
in the process. Although entry time can be influenced by various
factors such as the user’s experience with the device and typing
proficiency, we focus on reducing the overhead introduced by the
additional characters, and we further discuss the subjective factors
of users’ perceived overhead in the user study (Section 4.3).
A
C
T
Hand Movement Trajectory
VR Cursor Trajectory
Figure 4: The green arrows depict the cursor’s trajectory in
keyboard space, and the purple line denotes the user’s hand
trajectory in the physical world for typing word "CAT" using
virtual keyboard.
In VR applications, the cursor is often bound to handheld con-
trollers, and interactions with components require moving the cur-
sor to the target position. Typing on a virtual keyboard typically
involves two steps: moving the cursor to the target key and pressing
the button on the controller to select, and then this process repeats
for each character. We can see that a substantial portion of entry
time is spent on the controller movement. Meanwhile, to provide
a realistic user experience, the ratio between cursor movement in
virtual space and physical controller movement in the real world is
often close to one [31]. For example, the hand and cursor movement
trajectories for typing the word “CAT” on a virtual keyboard are
illustrated in Fig. 4. Thus, the entry time of a given password can be
approximated by the total distance traversed by the controller, or
equivalently by the cursor. Suppose 𝐶𝑖= (𝑥𝑖,𝑦𝑖) denotes the coor-
dinates of the 𝑖𝑡ℎcharacter in the password on the keyboard plane,
then the total distance traversed by the cursor for the entering the
password is computed using the following formula, where ∥· ∥2
denotes Euclidean distance:
𝑑𝑠𝑢𝑚=
𝑛
∑︁
𝑖=2
∥𝐶𝑖−𝐶𝑖−1∥2
Based on the above formula, the overhead can be calculated as
the difference in the distance between the original password and
the ghost password. Our objective is to reduce the overhead with-
out significantly compromising the enhanced security achieved by
VRSafe. We can either reduce the number ghost characters or use
weighted selection instead of uniform random choice. The former
can be adjusted by choosing different randomness levels discussed
in Algorithm 1. Here, we primarily focus on the latter. In natural
languages, certain bi-grams occur with similar frequencies, yet their
corresponding cursor traversal distances on the QWERTY keyboard
can differ substantially. For instance, the bi-gram "PA" shows up
10963 times and "PO" appears 11965 times in one million English
words [41]. This indicates that both bi-grams are equally plausible
from a linguistic standpoint, selecting either “A” or “O” as a ghost

character offers no meaningful advantage to an attacker. However,
typing "PO" results in a much smaller distance cost than "PA". There-
fore, we can choose ghost characters that are located closer on the
keyboard to reduce the moving overhead and yet achieve a similar
protection performance. We implement this constraint in two ways,
namely hard constraint and soft constraint. With hard constraint,
we remove the characters that are unacceptably far from the preced-
ing character by defining a threshold distance 𝜏and assigning zero
probability to any candidate that exceeds the threshold. In contrast,
the soft constraint does not explicitly eliminate distant characters
from the candidate set. Instead, it adjusts their probabilities of being
selected based on the distance. We compute the distance 𝑑between
each candidate ghost character 𝑐𝑖and preceding character 𝑐𝑖−1, and
adjust the selection probability using a softmax weighted function
where closer characters receive higher probabilities:
𝑃′(𝑐𝑖) =
𝑃(𝑐𝑖) exp(−𝜆𝑑(𝑐𝑖,𝑐𝑖−1))
Í
𝑗
𝑃(𝑐𝑗) exp −𝜆𝑑(𝑐𝑗,𝑐𝑖−1)
Higher 𝜆or lower 𝜏will both result in smaller overhead with a
more compact key distribution. However, it might increase the risk
of weakening the enhanced security. We discuss the performance
of VRSafe for different values of 𝜆and 𝜏in Section 4.
3.4
Inference Attack Detector
Although the proposed noise injector increases the difficulty of
obtaining the original password, an attacker may still correctly
guess the password given enough attempts. In this case, the total
number of brute-force attempts required to infer the correct orig-
inal password from the ghost password is approximately 𝑘× 2𝑛,
where 𝑘is the number of inferred ghost password candidates and
𝑛is the length of the ghost password owing to the subsequence
relationship between the ghost password and the real password.
Thus, it is crucial to add a detection mechanism to identify whether
an account is being actively targeted or guessed. By identifying
targeted guessing attempts early, the service provider can notify
the user to limit potential damage. We add a checker at the server
side inspired by the honey checker proposed in [16]. The approach
behind honey checker is to create false passwords (also called "hon-
eywords" or "decoy passwords") that are similar to the user’s real
password. All password hashes are stored in the credential database,
and the server knows which one is authentic. An adversary who
inverts the hashes will obtain multiple password candidates of each
user, and if the attacker attempts to authenticate with a decoy pass-
word, the server can immediately detect and flag the unauthorized
attempt. Typically, this approach is employed to defend against
attacks where password hash files from credential databases are
compromised by data breaches. In our context, the attacker has
knowledge of the ghost password which they believe is the original
password of the user, and this password can also be considered
as a "decoy password". Therefore, for better illustration, we refer
to the password used for detecting keystroke inference attacks as
"honeyword". If the adversary attempts to login with the ghost pass-
word, we can infer that a keystroke inference attack has previously
taken place. We draw this inference because neither the legitimate
user nor other types of attackers would use the ghost password for
authentication, and only a keystroke inference attacker possesses
knowledge of the ghost password.
To the best of our knowledge, no prior work has explored this
setting, and our approach provides a novel detection mechanism
specifically for keystroke inference attacks. Some research also
explored alarm raising attackers [15, 49, 53] where the goal is to
trigger false alarm than gaining unauthorized access. We argue that
keystroke inference attackers are unlikely to adopt this strategy for
the following reason: if an attacker already acquires user password
from keystroke inference attack, raising alarm would not give them
any profit about user’s sensitive information, and the password
would expire soon since the compromised user will be notified
by the server to change the password right away. As a result, a
keystroke inference attacker who is interested in user’s sensitive
data would always implement a false negative attack (i.e. try to
login without being noticed).
Honeyword Selection and Storage. Without any doubt, the ghost
password should be included as a honeyword, as it is highly likely
to be selected by an attacker in a login attempt. To broaden the de-
tection surface, we should include as many honeywords as possible,
however, introducing too many honeywords may greatly increase
verification time and impair the performance. To maximize detec-
tion rate while using a reasonable number of honeywords, we rank
all possible guesses in descending order of probability from the
password guessing model and choose the top 𝑛−1 guesses ex-
cluding the ghost password and the original password, making 𝑛
honeywords in total. As for false alarms caused by the user due to
typographic errors, since the ghost password has a requirement for
the minimum number of injected characters, the likelihood that
a user’s typo accidentally matches the ghost password should be
minimal.
We now discuss how to store the honeywords at the server. We
note that the ghost password is generated from a probabilistic model
which varies across login sessions, and the honeywords are derived
based on it. As a result, each time a user logs in using VRSafe, we
might get a different honeyword set and the total number tends to
increase as the user continues to log in multiple times over time. To
reduce the storage overhead associated with the growing number of
honeywords, we use bloom filter (BF)[4], a compact data structure
that tests whether an element is a member of a set with possible false
positives but guarantees that there are no false negatives. Using BF
has two advantages over storing honeywords as individual hashes.
First, it provides insert and lookup operation with constant time
𝑂(𝑘) regardless of the number of elements already inserted, where
𝑘is the number of hash functions of BF defined during initialization.
Second, the space cost of BF is fixed and it does not grow with the
number of stored elements. However, BF also has its limitations.
For a given BF consisting of 𝑘hash functions and size of the bit
array 𝑚, there would be a maximum expected elements 𝑛given a
certain false positive rate (FPR) 𝑝𝑓𝑝:
𝑝𝑓𝑝≈

1 −𝑒−𝑘𝑛
𝑚
𝑘
At the same time, the bloom filter does not support deletion op-
eration, which means that once the number of inserted elements
approaches the expected maximum 𝑛, we can only rebuild a new

filter, otherwise the FPR will become higher than expected. There-
fore, we need to have a good estimate on the expected growth trend
of the password logins by the user in order to avoid rebuilding the
BF frequently. According to a study on web password habits [10],
on average, a user logs into a website approximately 3.22 times
per day (i.e. roughly 1,000 times per year). Such estimates can be
used to determine the expected interval (e.g., 6 or 12 months) for
rebuilding a BF and the expected maximum number of elements.
4
Experiments
We evaluate VRSafe through both simulations and a real-world user
study approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). Before
presenting the experiment results, we first describe our experiment
setup.
4.1
Experiment Setup
Table 1: Summary of training time and iterations of models
used in this paper.
Model
Epoch
Training Time (Total)
Pass2Edit
3
24hr
Randomness Meter
10
10hr
3-Order Markov
-
2hr
We evaluate VRSafe based on real leaked password datasets namely
COMB datasets. The Compilation of Many Breaches (COMB) dataset
was firstly leaked in Feb. 2021 on a popular online hacking fo-
rum [37]. The dataset includes the largest volume of recently leaked
passwords from various websites. 1 Consistent with prior work[36,
50], we remove entries that contain non-ASCII printable characters
and empty rows. The cleaned dataset is described in Table 2. All
models are trained on Google Colab platform using T4 GPU and
High-RAM mode. For both training and testing, we choose pass-
words between 5 and 30 characters in length within the dataset, as
passwords outside this range are either too weak or unlikely to be
human chosen passwords. The targeted password guessing model
follows the setup in [50] except the data size. With the configuration
data size used in [50], it results in more than 7 days of training time
per epoch for large datasets. To ensure practical training efficiency,
we instead sample 50 million password pairs. For the randomness
meter model in Algorithm 1, we train on 5 million real passwords
and an equal number of randomly generated passwords with the
same length distribution for 10 epochs. The Markov model for ghost
character selection is trained on 5 million passwords. Training time
for all the models is shown in Table 1.
4.2
Experiment Results
We conducted a series of experiments to evaluate the factors that af-
fect the guessing accuracy and overhead. We also evaluate accuracy
and resource cost of our detection mechanism.
#1: Targeted Guessing vs. Simple Typo Correction. We first
illustrate that evaluating the effectiveness of our defense under
the password guessing model is a more realistic setup. To simulate
1The dataset was collected from publicly accessible websites for research purposes only.
We intentionally omit the source URL of the leaked dataset to limit further exposure.
passwords inferred from keystrokes, we randomly sample 20,000
passwords in the test set. Specifically, each character is replaced
with one of its adjacent keys on the QWERTY layout with a proba-
bility of 5%, which aligns with a character level inference accuracy
of approximately 95% in state-of-the-art studies [58]. We then copy
all passwords into a Google Doc, refining passwords with "spelling
and grammar" tools. Some suggestions will split the word into
phrases (e.g. "iloveyou" to "i love you"), we only accept the sug-
gestions that retain a single word. At the same time, we input the
passwords into the guessing model and pick the top-1 guess of each
password. We find that the refined passwords from Google Doc
have similar performance (64.55%) compared to targeted password
guessing model (64.69%) when no ghost characters are injected, but
it quickly falls behind once a small amount of noise is introduced
(27.52% vs. 32.78% with an injection probability 𝑃= 0.1). In real-
world cases, it is also likely to have false negative or false positive
keystrokes, which will result in larger divergence between inferred
passwords and original passwords. Therefore, using the password
guessing model can more accurately reflect the performance of our
defense against realistic attackers.
#2: Accuracy Analysis. We sample passwords in different cate-
gories to simulate users with different password choosing habits.
First, each character in a password can be classified as either digits,
letters or symbols [54], and prior work has shown that the number
of classes is one of the key factors affecting password guessing
performance [17, 29, 50]. We categorize passwords based on the
number of classes they consist of, denoted as Class-X where 𝑋
denotes the number of classes of characters in the password. For
instance, the password string "Jamesbond007" belongs to Class-2
passwords. In addition, password length is another important factor
that influences password guessing performance, with longer pass-
words generally being more difficult to guess accurately. In [50], the
researchers found that their model outperformed prior approaches
for passwords with lengths between 10 and 16 characters. Based on
this, we categorize passwords into Short (< 10), Medium (10 −16)
and Long (> 16) passwords to provide comprehensive evaluations
of our defense method. We input passwords to our noise injection
algorithm using 𝑝0 = 0.5, Δ𝑝= 0.05, 𝛼= 0.1 at various randomness
level 𝑟. Then we forward the ghost passwords to Pass2Edit pass-
word guessing model to determine the final adversary’s guesses.
Fig. 6 shows password guessing accuracy under different pass-
word lengths and number of classes at different number of guesses
(10, 100, 1000), which are common numbers evaluated in prior re-
search [36, 48, 50]. The x-axis represents different randomness
levels 𝑟as described in Algorithm 1 and y-axis represents guessing
accuracy under top-k guesses. Overall, using the Markov model in
selecting ghost characters results in a better performance compared
to uniform selection, especially for long passwords (see Table 3).
The password accuracy of Class-2, Long passwords using Markov
model achieve 5% to 15% lower accuracy compared to uniform selec-
tion under the same setting when 1,000 guesses are allowed across
all randomness levels (Fig. 6(e)). With different number of allowed
guesses, we observe that the adversary’s guessing accuracy has an
approximately linear relationship with the logarithm of the number
of guesses, and the accuracy under 10 guesses is only around 20%
(see Fig. 5). When the number of guesses increases, an attacker
typically needs to generate ten times as many candidates in order

Table 2: Data cleaning result of leaked password dataset.
Dataset
Leaked Time
Raw
Non-ASCII
Empty
Removed(%)
Cleaned
COMB
Feb. 2021
3,279,064,312
14,827,020
187,089
4.6
3,264,050,203
to achieve approximately twice the accuracy, and the improvement
is even smaller for more complex passwords.
Figure 5: The average guessing accuracy for randomness level
in [0.4,0.7] for both Markov and Uniform ghost character
generation under various # of guesses. Take Fig 6(e) as an
example.
Randomness level 𝑟also plays a critical role in affecting accuracy.
When 𝑟is low(𝑟< 0.3), the algorithm strongly prefers to copy
the character from the original password, resulting in a small or
even minimum number of injected ghost characters, therefore, the
accuracy remains high and the original password is still likely to be
guessed. On the other hand, a very high randomness level (𝑟> 0.7),
drives the algorithm to produce extremely long and random pass-
words, negatively impacting usability. From the perspective of bal-
ancing usability and security, we conclude that the ghost injection
algorithm achieves a good performance under 𝑟∈[0.4, 0.6], and
we will discuss how to further reduce overhead with acceptable
trade-off on accuracy in the following experiments.
Table 3: Guessing accuracy of Class-2 passwords under 1,000
guesses.
Randomness
Length
Accuracy (%)
Level
Uniform
Markov
0.3
Medium
64.36
73.22
Long
60.80
55.28
0.5
Medium
44.32
40.28
Long
30.12
15.14
0.7
Medium
0.64
0.00
Long
0.30
0.04
#3: Overhead in Typing. While increasing the number of ghost
characters consistently reduces the attack accuracy, it also intro-
duces additional overhead which can potentially impact usability.
As shown in Table 5, overhead measured in moving distance al-
ways exhibits a trade-off relationship with guessing accuracy. For
instance, when the randomness level is fixed at 0.4, increasing 𝜆
from 0 (i.e. no constraint) to 0.2 and 0.5, the overhead reduces from
34.5% to 24.2% and 18.1%, respectively, but simultaneously increases
adversary’s guessing accuracy to 1.12% and 3.5%, respectively. We
also see that, the main factor affecting accuracy is the randomness
level, and applying constraints does not cause guessing accuracy
to deviate significantly from the baseline accuracy at the same
randomness level without constraints. Moreover, as more ghost
characters are injected, our method achieves greater overhead re-
duction, thereby improving usability. These results demonstrate
that VRSafe can be flexibly configured in different methods and
parameters for different user and application needs.
#4: Detecting Malicious Logins. Previous experiments show that
injecting ghost characters cannot prevent the adversary from guess-
ing the original password if we allow a large number of guesses. In
this experiment, we build a malicious login detector with bloom
filter with maximum expected element, 𝑛= 106 elements, expected
𝐹𝑃𝑅= 10−30 and SHA-256 as hash function to ensure enough capac-
ity to store honeywords with low risk of false positive. We believe
this is a reasonable setup for most websites that enforce a manda-
tory password renewal policy not exceeding one year. Given that a
typical user is likely to log in thousands of times in this period [10],
the chosen configuration ensures that a sufficient number of hon-
eywords can be generated without exceeding the bloom filter’s
maximum expected capacity. We generate a total of 20 honeywords
including the ghost password using the same password guessing
framework, but with only 1/10 of the data size, which is already
sufficient for detecting malicious login at high accuracy. As shown
in Table 4, on average, 52.04% of malicious attempts can be detected
in the first guess, and 83.97% are identified within 10 malicious
login attempts. If we expand the number of honeywords to 100, the
detector can achieve 72.43% and 96.05% detection rate under 1 and
10 login attempts, respectively.
Table 4: Malicious login attempts detection rate under # of
honeywords = 20.
Randomness
Login
Detection
Level
Attempts
Rate (%)
0.3
1
57.18
10
86.32
0.5
1
54.76
10
85.36
0.7
1
42.20
10
78.04
#5: Computing Resource Cost. We evaluated the computing
resource usage for VRSafe. The time and memory costs of the mali-
cious login detection bloom filter are summarized in Table 6, with a
storage space cost of approximately 17.55 MB. We further measured
the CPU and memory cost for running VRSafe using Android Debug
Bridge (ADB), a widely used development toolkit recommended
in official Meta documentation [30]. Over a 10-minute profiling

Figure 6: Password guessing accuracy for passwords in 6 categories, for each contains curves under 2 different ghost password
selection strategies and 3 different allowed guessing numbers.
Table 5: Overhead and accuracy of ghost passwords under different constraints.
Randomness
Length
No Constr.
Soft (Distance/Acc(%))
Hard (Distance/Acc(%))
Level
Distance/Acc(%)
𝜆= 0.2
𝜆= 0.5
𝜏= 3
𝜏= 6
0.3
Medium
4.52/73.22
4.26/74.72
4.11/75.56
4.07/73.84
4.2/74.92
Long
5.14/55.28
4.89/57.26
4.75/57.54
4.71/57.46
4.84/56.60
0.4
Medium
4.83/62.68
4.46/63.80
4.24/66.18
4.19/64.52
4.37/64.64
Long
5.83/35.68
5.34/35.72
5.05/36.82
4.97/36.60
5.21/36.38
0.5
Medium
5.88/40.28
5.09/41.70
4.65/42.00
4.56/42.06
4.91/41.54
Long
7.36/15.14
6.23/15.34
5.63/15.96
5.54/16.34
6.01/14.90
0.6
Medium
8.48/3.08
6.64/4.50
5.69/4.02
5.51/3.62
6.33/3.68
Long
10.06/0.94
7.9/0.94
6.73/0.90
6.48/1.00
7.48/1.28
0.7
Medium
10.30/0.00
7.86/0.04
6.47/0.10
6.26/0.02
7.46/0.06
Long
11.53/0.04
8.82/0.00
7.36/0.02
7.07/0.02
8.39/0.02
0.8
Medium
10.37/0.00
7.94/0.00
6.57/0.00
6.31/0.00
7.54/0.00
Long
11.69/0.00
8.94/0.00
7.45/0.00
7.17/0.00
8.5/0.00
Note: Distance for original medium length passwords is 3.59, for long passwords is 4.3.
session on Meta Quest 2, VRSafe with ghost character added during
typing has a CPU utilization averaging 48% (with a range of 35-62%)
and memory averaging 1.77 GB. In comparison, typing without the
ghost character (i.e. using the regular QWERTY keyboard) showed
a similar average CPU utilization of 48% (with a range of 35-52%)
and a slightly lower average memory usage of 1.75 GB. These re-
sults indicate that enabling the ghost character introduces only
marginal memory overhead and no noticeable increase in average
CPU utilization.
4.3
User Study
Methods. Our study is approved by our Institutional Review Board
(IRB). To simulate user account logins using password within a VR
environment, we developed a VR application using Unity 2022.3.24f1
that uses VRSafe as the keyboard for typing (Fig. 3). Participants

Table 6: Bloom filter time and space cost.
Operation
Time (s)
Memory (KiB)
Init
4.20e-05
0.37
Insert
7.02e-06
4.38
Lookup
4.35e-06
4.38
in our study were seated in a chair and instructed to complete the
password typing tasks, and their actions were recorded by a cam-
era to simulate video-based keystroke inference attacks (see Fig. 8
in Appendix A). All participants were informed of the recording
and provided consent. To protect participants’ privacy, facial in-
formation was excluded from the recordings, and the passwords
used for the typing tasks were selected from the publicly available
leaked datasets. We did not initially disclose that the recording sim-
ulated an attack scenario, to avoid influencing participants’ natural
typing behavior. After completing the study, we fully debriefed
participants on the experiment design, including the purpose of the
video recording, and addressed any concerns or questions. Each
participant received 10 USD as appreciation. Participants were first
introduced to the essential knowledge for using the VR device (e.g.,
moving the cursor, typing), as well as the differences between a
standard keyboard and the VRSafe keyboard. They were then given
five minutes to explore the application freely. The main experiment
consisted of ten password typing tasks. The first two tasks involved
standard keyboard input without ghost characters, serving as a
baseline. The remaining eight tasks incorporated ghost characters,
simulating the enhanced security mechanism of VRSafe. After com-
pleting each task, the participant notifies the researcher and clicks
the “Next” button on the login page to proceed to the next task.
Upon completion of all tasks, participants were asked to complete
a post-study questionnaire regarding their experience. We used
MediaPipe [59], a popular hand-tracking framework to extract the
keystrokes from the collected video clips.
Results: We recruited 15 participants (mean age = 25.6, sd = 4.22; 7
males, 8 females) in this study through printed flyers and announce-
ments in weekly newsletters. All participants were over 18 years
old. There were no restrictions regarding student status or prior
VR experience, and the only requirement was for the participant
to have a normal or corrected-to-normal vision when wearing the
VR headset. Among the 15 participants, 9 do not have any prior
experience with VR headset, and the remaining 6 use VR devices
less than once per month. A total of 150 video clips were recorded,
of which 6 were discarded. 2 The average password length across
all tasks was 8.35. The average number of keystrokes detected in
the baseline tasks (without ghost characters) was 10.5, while the
average in the remaining eight tasks (with ghost characters) was
16.2.
We find that the "false keystrokes" are treated as authentic ones
by the threat model and injected to the inferred keystroke inference
as expected. We examine if using VRSafe will result in longer entry
time compared to a normal QWERTY keyboard. In Fig. 7, we plot
2Mediapipe failed to recognize hands in 2 videos since the participant had long wearable
nail extensions and 3 videos were discarded since the participant misunderstood the
ghost character typing process as a bug and terminated the task. 1 video was discarded
because the hand tracking was lost and the participant could not proceed with the
task.
the entry times of all 15 participants across the 10 typing tasks and
we highlight the first two tasks (i.e. no ghost characters) with red
dots. We observe that the average entry time of most participants
fall within 40 to 60 seconds, with no evident pattern suggesting
that tasks with added ghost characters take significantly longer.
For instance, some participants (e.g. P2, P13) completed baseline
tasks more quickly, while others (e.g. P1, P8) showed longer or
mixed durations. As the visual distributions do not suggest a clear
difference in entry time between the conditions, we aggregated data
across all participants and applied the Mann-Whitney U test [28] to
formally assess the effect of task typing when ghost characters are
included. The analysis indicates a statistically significant difference
between the two groups (𝑈= 1148.5, 𝑝= 0.0072 < 0.05). To further
investigate the source of the observed difference, we perform pair-
wise tests. Specifically, we treated the two baseline tasks from each
of the 15 participants as a single baseline group (totaling 2×15=30
samples), and the remaining tasks were grouped by their task index
(i.e. all third tasks from each participant, all fourth tasks, and so
on). We then apply pair-wise tests between the baseline group and
the other groups one by one, and the third task group (i.e. first task
involving ghost characters) shows the greatest difference from the
baseline, suggesting it is the primary driver of the overall significant
difference. It indicates that even though participants were already
aware of the ghost character mechanism, they still paused when
they first encountered it. We attribute this to a natural learning
curve, and expect the impact to diminish as users become more
familiar with the application.
In the post-task questionnaire, we use the System Usability Scale
(SUS) [6] to evaluate Perceived Ease of Use (PEOU), Perceived
Usefulness (PU) and Behavioral Intention to Use (BI) from the
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [9] to measure the user’s
acceptance. 3 The full questionnaire can be found in Table 10 (Ap-
pendix A). We also test the validity and reliability of our question
setting using Cronbach’s Alpha [7] and Average Variance Extracted
(AVE) [11] (Table 9, Appendix A). All Cronbach’s Alpha scores are
around or above 0.8, and AVEs exceed 0.6, indicating that our ques-
tions effectively evaluate the design across different aspects in the
same direction. The statistical results are shown in Table 7, and
per-question descriptive statistics of SUS are provided in Table 8(Ap-
pendix A). We also ask some open-ended questions to encourage
participants to share their thoughts freely, and we find that partic-
ipants evaluate VRSafe differently depending on the aspects they
prioritize. Some participants appreciated the enhanced security and
expressed a willingness to adopt even more sophisticated methods.
Others thought that typing in VR is already challenging, adding
extra steps could become overwhelming even if it becomes more
secure. This divergence in user perspectives helps explain the wide
variance observed in the SUS scores. Participants also comment
on general VR device usage experience such as "improve respon-
siveness", "control can be more accurate", "headset feels too heavy"
which are not directly related to the VRSafe design.
5
Conclusions
In this paper, we present VRSafe, a VR keyboard to protect users
from keystroke inference attacks. The proposed solution is designed
3SUS score ranges from 0-100; PEOU, PU and BI range from 0-5.

Figure 7: Password entry time of all participants in all 10 tasks.
Table 7: Statistical results of participants’ survey feedback.
Item
Min
Max
Mean
Sd
PEOU
1.75
4.75
3.88
0.83
PU
2.33
5.00
3.38
0.80
BI
1.50
5.00
3.30
1.28
SUS
25
90
58.6
14.4
to enhance the word-level security of password inputs for VR users
using a standard virtual QWERTY keyboard layout. VRSafe is the
first novel solution to incorporate a detection mechanism to iden-
tify unauthorized login attempts using credentials inferred from
keystroke inference attacks. Our experiment evaluation shows that
VRSafe is effective against attacks based on password guessing
models and incurs only a modest overhead to achieve enhanced
password security and detect malicious login attempts. The results
of our user study indicate that VRSafe can be a highly usable alter-
native for normal users with higher security needs. VRSafe is also
potentially applicable to other forms of keystroke inference attacks
including acoustic-based and Wifi-based attacks and our future
work is focused on extending VRSafe to protect against those forms
of attacks. We also plan to investigate mechanisms for protecting
sensitive text entered by virtual avatars in extended reality appli-
cations. Unlike conventional keystroke attacks, where adversaries
observe a victim’s physical actions in the real world, extended real-
ity environments allow adversaries to directly inspect the actions
of virtual avatars, potentially revealing additional information that
can be exploited to infer keystrokes.