1
Catching the Fly: Practical Challenges
in Making Blockchain FlyClient Real
Pericle Perazzo Dario Capecchi
Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing
Abstract—FlyClient is a lightweight blockchain verification
protocol that enables proof-of-work validation using minimal
data, making it ideal for resource-constrained environments like
mobile wallets, Internet-of-Things devices or cross-chain bridges
implemented with smart contracts. Despite its strong potential for
enabling lightweight blockchain verification, FlyClient protocol
is still in the experimental stages, with limited real-world deploy-
ments and performance evaluations under diverse conditions. In
this paper we bridge the gap between theory and deployment, by
addressing several technical challenges to advance FlyClient to
a production-ready solution. Namely, our contribution is three-
fold: (i) we formally introduce an adversary model alternative to
the original FlyClient one, that allows us to parametrize a verifier
under a concrete economic interpretation, while also saving some
proof space; (ii) we provide the first practical FlyClient prover
implementation for a production blockchain (Zcash), and we
estimate its performance under different configurations; (iii) we
introduce and evaluate two optimizations that minimize the size
of FlyClient proofs, the first of which does not require any
consensus change.
Index Terms—Blockchain, FlyClient, lightweight verification,
Zcash, cross-chain bridges.
I. INTRODUCTION
F
LYCLIENT [1]–[3] is an innovative protocol designed
to enable ultra-light clients for Proof-of-Work (PoW)
blockchains. Traditional blockchain clients require download-
ing and verifying large amounts of data to ensure security
and correctness, which is impractical for resource-constrained
execution environments. FlyClient addresses this challenge by
leveraging probabilistic sampling of block headers combined
with Merkle Mountain Range (MMR) commitments, thus
producing proofs of chain validity that grow only logarith-
mically with the chain length. The FlyClient protocol allows
clients to verify the entire blockchain with minimal bandwidth
and storage requirements, while maintaining strong security
guarantees. It can produce both interactive or non-interactive
proofs, and it can also deal with PoW difficulty variability.
FlyClient finds application in those cases in which the state
of the blockchain must be verified by execution environments
with limited resources. A straightforward application is mo-
bile wallets, which must make sure the presence of given
transactions inside the blockchain. Current mobile wallets
trust third-party full nodes to maintain and check the whole
blockchain, but FlyClient can do the same without any trust
Pericle Perazzo and Dario Capecchi are with the Department of Infor-
mation Engineering, University of Pisa, 56122 Pisa, Italy (e-mails: peri-
cle.perazzo@unipi.it, dario.capecchi@ing.unipi.it).
assumption. Another application is in the Internet of Things
(IoT), in which resource-constrained devices can use FlyClient
to perform machine-to-machine transactions or read and write
immutable logs. A third application is in blockchain bridges,
which are aimed at moving a crypto-asset from a blockchain
to another blockchain and back. Current blockchain bridges
employ trusted third-party nodes or federations of nodes, but
FlyClient allows a smart contract to verify the state of a foreign
blockchain by validating a non-interactive FlyClient proof.
This permits trustless bridges, in which the correctness of a
cross-chain interaction is automatically proved without trusting
any (particular) node. A blockchain can support the FlyClient
functionalities natively [2] or by means of smart contracts [3].
Among the cryptocurrencies that natively support FlyClient,
Zcash [4] is the most important and capitalized one. Zcash
integrated FlyClient through ZIP 221 [5] as part of the
Heartwood network upgrade. Despite this, no FlyClient prover
for Zcash has been developed yet, and the FlyClient protocol
is still in the experimental stages.
This paper addresses several technical challenges to advance
FlyClient from a theoretical concept to a production-ready
solution. In particular, its contribution is three-fold. First, we
introduce the wa-adversary model as an alternative to the
original FlyClient’s (c, L)-adversary model. The wa-adversary
is based on a single parameter that directly captures the
budget available to the attacker for performing his attack,
and thus it has a concrete economic interpretation useful for
real deployments. A FlyClient verifier can be parametrized
by assuming a certain wa-adversary and solving an optimiza-
tion problem, which also offers some proof size reduction
that we measure. Second, we present our experiences in
extending Zebrad [6], which is the Rust-based official full
node implementation of Zcash, for offering FlyClient prover
functionalities. We also estimate the extra resources that are
needed for such functionalities, and we measure the proof size
under different representations and different verifier variants.
The prover implementation is made available to the Zebrad
community, which, at the time of writing, has already accepted
some of our extensions in the Zebrad official repository.
Third, we introduce and evaluate two optimizations that aim
at minimizing the size of the interactive and non-interactive
FlyClient proofs. Namely, we introduce the cumulative proofs
and the distilled proofs. The former optimization offers limited
advantage (-9.16% non-interactive proof size), but it is already
deployable at zero cost. The latter one requires a change in
the consensus layer, but it offers a more substantial advantage
(-71.33% non-interactive proof size).
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
arXiv:2604.26736v1 [cs.CR] 29 Apr 2026

2
discusses related work. Section III explains the necessary
background concepts. Section IV introduces the wa-adversary
model and the relative configuration method for the verifier.
Section V introduces and evaluates our FlyClient prover im-
plementation for Zcash. Section VI introduces and evaluates
our proposed FlyClient proof optimizations. Finally, the paper
is concluded in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Research on FlyClient
B¨unz et al. [1] introduced the FlyClient protocol to enable
extremely lightweight verification of PoW blockchains by
reducing the data requirements for clients from linear to
logarithmic complexity. FlyClient achieves efficiency through
probabilistic sampling and MMR commitments embedded in
block headers, allowing clients to verify the entire chain with
only a logarithmic number of sampled blocks, even in the
case of variable-difficulty blockchains. The authors model the
adversary as a (c, L)-adversary, that is an attacker that cannot
produce an L-long fork with c validity ratio. Although this
modeling is convenient to mathematically prove the security
properties of FlyClient, it lacks a direct economic interpreta-
tion, thus it is less convenient from the point of view of a
real deployment. The present paper introduces the alternative
wa-adversary model, which is based on a single parameter
that directly captures the budget available to the attacker for
performing his attack, and thus it has a concrete economic
interpretation.
Nemoz and Zamyatin [2] explore the security implications
of deploying FlyClient using a velvet fork, which allows back-
ward compatibility without requiring all nodes to upgrade. In
particular, the authors explored the possibility of chain-sewing
attacks (originally introduced by [7]), in which an adversary
stitches together parts of different chains to deceive FlyClient
verifiers about the state of the blockchain. This attack is
feasible because, in a velvet fork, a block could contain invalid
FlyClient data without being rejected by the nodes. However,
this does not apply to Zcash, which implemented FlyClient via
a hard fork. In the Zcash case, all blocks are required to include
valid FlyClient data, hence preventing the conditions necessary
for the chain-sewing attack to succeed. Our FlyClient prover
implementation is therefore immune to chain-sewing attacks.
Perazzo and Xefraj [3] proposed SmartFly, a FlyClient im-
plementation via smart contracts which does not require forks
at all. The nodes that invoke the smart contract methods do not
need to be trusted, as long as the smart contract language can
access the hash of the most recent block. SmartFly does not
need changes in the blockchain format or forks of any kind,
but it requires some monetary cost to be maintained, due to the
invocations of smart contract methods. Our FlyClient prover is
based on Zcash, which implemented FlyClient via a hard fork,
so it does not require any monetary cost to be maintained.
B. FlyClient Alternatives
Kiayias et al. [8] and Kiayias et al. [9] proposed PoPoW and
NIPoPoW, which first enabled sublinear (logarithmic) verifica-
tion for light clients of PoW blockchains. These techniques are
0
1
3
4
7
8
10
11
15
16
18
2
5
9
12
17
6
13
14
genesis
header
MMR root
MMR nodes
block headers
transactions
hashes
tip
header
peak MMR nodes
Fig. 1. Example of MMR constructed over a blockchain.
based on superblocks, that are blocks with a PoW difficulty
higher than the difficulty target. Unfortunately, PoPoW and
NIPoPoW assume a constant difficulty, and they do not apply
well in real blockchains where difficulty is variable and
automatically adjusted from the mining timestamps. FlyClient
is able to produce logarithmic-size proofs as well, but at the
same time it can also deal with PoW difficulty variations.
Bonneau et al. [10] proposed Coda, which uses recursive
SNARK proofs to compress the whole blockchain into a single
constant-size proof, so that its validity can be verified in
constant time. Despite being promising from the point of view
of the verifier’s performance, Coda requires a high compu-
tational cost for block producers, and a complete re-design
of the blockchain protocol, hence it is not easily applicable
to already existing cryptocurrencies. Vesely et al. [11] use
(non-recursive) SNARK proofs to implement ultralight clients.
With respect to Coda, Plumo is applicable to already existing
blockchains. Moreover, it is consensus-agnostic, in the sense
that it can be applied independently of the kind of employed
consensus: PoW or PoS or BFT. Plumo enjoys thus a larger
applicability with respect to FlyClient, which applies only to
PoW blockchains. However, Plumo incurs significantly higher
prover-side computational costs due to proof generation, com-
pared to FlyClient which requires only lightweight operations
such as MMR maintenance and header serving. Interestingly,
SNARKs and FlyClient are not mutually exclusive solutions,
in the sense that a non-interactive FlyClient proof could in
principle be “compressed” with SNARK techniques. We plan
to explore such a possibility in future work.
III. BACKGROUND
A. MMR and Proofs of Ancestry
The FlyClient protocol [1] is based on the Merkle Mountain
Range (MMR) data structure [12], which is an extension of
a Merkle tree that allows for efficient (logarithmic) appends.
Fig. 1 exemplifies an MMR constructed over a blockchain.
The blockchain is an ordered sequence of blocks, each of
which is composed by a small block header (or simply header)
and a potentially big number of ordered transactions. Each
header contains a commitment of all the block’s transactions,
which in the figure is simplified by a single hash, but in real

3
implementations is a Merkle tree root to allow for efficient
inclusion proofs. Each header contains the hash of the previous
header (previous hash), thus composing the so-called header
chain. The first header is called genesis header. It is well-
known by all the protocol participants and it contains a null
previous hash. The (currently) last header is called tip header.
The MMR is built starting from the leaf nodes, each of which
is relative to a header and contains its hash. Each intermediate
node of the MMR contains the hash of both its children. In
general, the MMR is not balanced, but it can be seen as a
sequence of balanced Merkle trees (the mountains), whose
root nodes are called peak MMR nodes, or simply peaks.
The peaks and their descendants are persistent, in the sense
that they make part of the MMR forever, independently on
how many appends are done. They have a unique numerical
identifier, which reflects the order of their creation. The MMR
nodes over the peaks are called generated MMR nodes, they
are not persistent, and they do not have any identifier. The
purpose of the generated MMR nodes is to reduce the peaks
into a single root node, whose hash is then stored in the
header successive to the last one covered by the MMR. Each
MMR node contains all the pieces of information needed to
check the plausibility of the difficulty transitions between the
blocks covered by the node itself. Typically, it contains the
timestamps and the difficulties of the first and the last covered
block, and the cumulative work of all the covered blocks.
It is possible to build a logarithmic-size proof of ancestry
that proves that a given MMR is an ancestor of another MMR,
that is the latter has been obtained from the former with a given
number of appends. Each MMR is represented by the header
that contains its root hash. The proof of ancestry of header i
with respect to header j > i is constituted by the minimal set
of nodes of the MMR of header j that cover exactly all the
headers except header i. For example, the proof of ancestry
of header i = 6 with respect to the tip header j = 11 in Fig.
1 is constituted by the green MMR nodes.
B. FlyClient Protocol
FlyClient [1] is a super-light client protocol designed
for Proof-of-Work (PoW) blockchains. Its goal is to allow
resource-constrained devices like mobile wallets or IoT de-
vices to verify the validity of an entire blockchain without
downloading all block headers or trusting any third-party full
node. By using the FlyClient protocol, a prover can convince
a verifier to own a header chain of a given length, and that
these headers are valid, meaning that they all contain a valid
proof of work and the difficulty transitions between them are
correct. To do this without downloading all the headers, the
verifier first downloads the tip header from the prover, then it
samples a logarithmic number of headers. “Sampling a header”
means (i) downloading it, (ii) checking its proof of work to be
valid, (iii) downloading and checking its ancestry proof with
respect to the tip header, (iv) checking the plausibility of the
difficulty transitions via the MMR nodes of the ancestry proof.
The verifier deterministically samples the last ndet headers
precedent to the tip header, and nprob headers probabilistically
chosen among the precedent ones, using a specific probability
function biased towards the rightmost headers.
To parametrize ndet and nprob we have to assume a (c, L)-
adversary, that is a malicious prover that cannot produce a fork
longer than L with c validity ratio, except with probability
negligible with the security parameter λ. If a verifier wants to
guarantee that such an adversary has less than 2−λ probability
to succeed in his attack, then it can parametrize the FlyClient
protocol with:
ndet
=
L
(1)
nprob
=
λ
log0.5

1 −
1
logc δ
,
(2)
where n is the chain length, and δ is the fraction of work
sampled deterministically over the total chain work. In general,
δ =
Pn
i=n−L+1 di
Pn
i=1 di
where di is the difficulty of the i-th block
of the chain, while in case of fixed difficulty it simplifies in
δ = L/n. We call FlyClient proof the set of headers and
MMR nodes downloaded by the verifier during the FlyClient
protocol. The FlyClient proof convinces the verifier that the
prover owns a valid header chain of a given length.
The FlyClient protocol has a non-interactive version, which
allows the prover to be offline while the verifier checks
the FlyClient proof. In this way the FlyClient proof can be
conveniently stored on a file, a database, or a smart contract. To
produce a non-interactive FlyClient proof, a prover must apply
the Fiat-Shamir heuristic [13] to the tip header, and increase
the protocol parameters in order to compensate the relative
decrease in protocol security. With the same (c, L)-adversary
and the same 2−λ target probability of adversarial success, the
verifier must parametrize the non-interactive FlyClient proof
with:
ndet
=
L
(3)
nprob
=
λ −log0.5(c · n)
log0.5

1 −
1
logc δ
.
(4)
C. Zcash Implementation of FlyClient
Zcash [4] implemented FlyClient through ZIP 221 [5]
as part of the Heartwood network upgrade, with a hard
fork happened on July 2020. Since then, as of April 2026
Zcash underwent four more consensus changes called network
upgrades, each implemented with a hard fork. Namely the
network upgrades have been Canopy (November 2020), NU5
(2022), NU6 (2024), and the minor upgrade NU6.1 (November
2025). Some of them changed the format and/or the meaning
of the fields in the headers and the MMR nodes. The part
of the blockchain that uses the same consensus rules between
two network upgrades is called consensus branch. Notably,
the MMR does not grow indefinitely in Zcash, but rather its
construction reboots from scratch at each network upgrade. In
practice each consensus branch has its own MMR independent
to the precedent ones, and the first header of each consensus
branch constitutes the connection point between the old and
the new MMR. This multi-MMR approach deviates from
the original FlyClient mechanism [1] and it guarantees the
cryptographic independency of different consensus branches.
In this section we refer to the Zcash protocol version
of NU6, as the newer NU6.1 did not change anything in

4
the FlyClient-related mechanisms. Each node of the MMR
maintained by the Zcash protocol has the following fields:
• hashSubtreeCommitment: the hash of the corre-
sponding block header in case the node is a leaf, or
the hash of the right and left child nodes serialized and
concatenated together in case the node is not a leaf. It is
represented on 32 bytes.
• nEarliestTimestamp, nLatestTimestamp: the
mining timestamps respectively of the first and the last
block covered by the node, which are the same block in
case the node is a leaf. They are represented each on 4
bytes.
• nEarliestTargetBits,
nLatestTargetBits:
the difficulty targets respectively of the first and the last
block covered by the node. They are represented each
on 4 bytes.
• nEarliestHeight, nLatestHeight: the heights
respectively of the first and the last block covered by the
node. They are represented each with a variable-length
format, whose size varies from 1 (for small numbers) to
9 bytes (for big numbers).
• nSubTreeTotalWork: the cumulative difficulty of the
blocks covered by the node. It is represented on 32 bytes.
There are some additional fields that are not used directly by
the FlyClient protocol, but rather they serve different security
or efficiency purposes that are foreseeable for super-light
clients. The total size of a Zcash MMR node varies between
212 and 244 bytes.
Each block header contains the following fields:
• hashBlockCommitments:
a
cryptographic
commitment
of
hashAuthDataRoot
and
hashChainHistoryRoot,
which
in
turn
are
a
commitment to all transaction authorization data in the
block, and a commitment to the root of the MMR built
from the genesis to the block previous to this. It is
represented on 32 bytes.
• nTime: the block timestamp encoded as a Unix epoch
time. It is represented on 4 bytes.
• nBits: the target threshold that the block header hash
must satisfy for proof of work. It is represented on 4
bytes.
• nNonce: an arbitrary field that miners vary in order to
search for a header hash meeting the target threshold. It
is represented on 32 bytes.
• solutionSize: an integer on 3 bytes, whose value is
always 1344.
• solution: the Equihash solution included in the header
and required to be valid under the consensus rules. It is
represented on 1344 bytes.
IV. ADVERSARY MODEL AND FLYCLIENT
PARAMETRIZATION
The original FlyClient paper [1] models the adversary as
a (c, L)-adversary, that is an attacker that cannot produce a
fork longer than L with c validity ratio, except with negligible
probability. This modeling style is an extension of the classic
adversary model in blockchain research, which is based on
the share of resources (hash power or stake) controlled by
the adversary. However, it is not convenient from the point
of view of concrete deployment, because it is unclear how
a realistic attacker can fit the two parameters L and c, and
this eventually leads to an arbitrary parametrization of the
FlyClient verifier. In this paper we introduce the wa-adversary
model, which is easier to understand because it is based on
a single parameter that directly captures the expected budget
available to the attacker for performing his attack, and thus
it has a straightforward and easy interpretation. We show
that the wa-adversary model enables direct mapping from
expected attacker budget to verifier parameters, achieving the
same security of (c, L)-based configurations while simplifying
deployment and also reducing the proof size as side effect.
A. wa-Adversary
Assuming a wa-adversary means assuming that the attacker
cannot produce blocks with more than wa cumulative work
with non-negligible probability, while respecting the difficulty
transition rules. We call wa the adversarial work budget. More
formally, we state the following.
Definition IV.1 (wa-adversary). An adversary A is a wa-
adversary if, in any attack execution against a FlyClient
verifier, the valid malicious blocks that A can generate while
respecting the consensus rules have at most wa cumulative
work, except with probability negligible with a security pa-
rameter.
The wa-adversary has a direct monetary interpretation,
because we can compute the expected cost of producing a
valid block in terms of machinery and energy consumption.
In general, given the expected cost C51%/h of mounting a 51%
attack (that is the cost of producing the same hashrate of the
honest network) for 1 hour, and given the expected number of
blocks nhonest/h produced by the honest network in 1 hour,
the current average block difficulty ˜d, and the adversarial work
budget wa, we can compute the expected adversarial budget
as Budgeta = C51%/h ·
wa
˜d·nhonest/h . For example, at the time
of writing performing a 51% attack against Zcash for one
hour is estimated to cost about 20,000 USD1. Considering that
the Zcash network produces 48 blocks each hour in average,
and assuming an adversarial work budget of 45,000 GH2 and
a current average block difficulty of 900 GH, the expected
adversarial budget to produce them is thus 20,833 USD. Of
course a similar estimation could be done for other PoW-based
blockchains as well. Note however that this estimate could be
optimistic, for two reasons. First of all because the computed
budget is only an expected one, not a real one. Indeed, the
attacker could be lucky in finding valid blocks, and thus he
could produce more than 50 blocks with the same budget.
Secondly, producing older valid blocks could be cheaper than
producing newer ones, due to the tendential rise of the PoW
difficulty. To mitigate this second source of optimism, one
1https://www.crypto51.app/ (accessed on 5 April 2026).
2In this paper we conveniently measure the work in GH (GigaHash), that
is the expected number of hashes that have been computed by the miner to
produce the block(s).

5
should consider the cost of producing an average block of the
blockchain, from the genesis to the tip.
B. FlyClient Parametrization
We then show how to parameterize a FlyClient verifier based
on such an adversary model. According to the definition, a
wa-adversary cannot create a fork of valid blocks with more
than wa work in them. Therefore, such an adversary fulfills
a traditional (c, L)-adversary assumption with c = 1 and
L = min

ν
Pn
i=n−ν+1 di ≥wa
 
. In addition, he cannot
create a fork of blocks with more than 2wa work in them,
half of which is valid, so he fulfills also another (c, L)-
adversary assumption this time with c = 0.5 and L =
min

ν
Pn
i=n−ν+1 di ≥2wa
 
. In general, a wa-adversary
assumption automatically fulfills a family of (c, L)-adversary
assumptions having the property:
L ≥min
(
ν

n
X
i=n−ν+1
di ≥wa/c
)
.
(5)
More formally, we state the following:
Lemma IV.1 (Reduction to a family of (c, L)-adversaries).
Let A be a wa-adversary. Then, for every possible c ∈[0, 1]
and L > 0 such that Eq. 5 is respected, such an adversary
cannot violate the (c, L)-adversary assumption.
Proof sketch. By definition, a wa-adversary can produce ma-
licious blocks with at most wa valid work in them, except
with negligible probability. Consider any possible fork pro-
duced by A with length LA and validity ratio cA. Only
two cases are possible. In case cA < c then the (c, L)-
adversary assumption is not violated, since the fork has an
insufficient validity ratio. On the other hand, in case cA ≥c,
A produced a fork with a correct validity ratio, but with an
insufficient length LA ≤min

ν
Pn
i=n−ν+1 di ≥wa/cA
 
≤
min

ν
Pn
i=n−ν+1 di ≥wa/c
 
≤L. Thus even in this case
the (c, L)-adversary assumption is not violated.
Let us suppose a verifier that is configured according
to any of these (c, L)-adversary assumptions. Successfully
attacking such a verifier requires to violate the (c, L)-adversary
assumption, which in turn requires to violate the wa-adversary
assumption. This in practice makes the (c, L) pair a degree of
freedom that we can use to configure conveniently our verifier.
In other words, to be secure against the wa-adversary, the
verifier can be configured to be secure against any of the
possible (c, L)-adversaries of the family specified by Eq. 5,
chosen at will. More formally, we state the following.
Theorem IV.1 (Security of the wa-parametrized verifier).
Assuming a chain length n and a FlyClient verifier V
parametrized according to Eqq. 1 and 2 (Eqq. 3 and 4 in case
of non-interactive) with (c, L) such that Eq. 5 is respected, and
with security parameter λ, then a wa-adversary cannot make V
accept an invalid chain with probability more than negligible
with the security parameter.
Proof sketch. By the Lemma IV.1, the wa-adversary cannot
violate the (c, L)-adversary assumption. Thus, Theorem 1 in
[1] (security of FlyClient) directly yields the claim.
Normally, the best thing would be to choose c and L
in such a way to minimize the proof size, but this would
be overly complex and would depend on the sizes and the
representation format of the block headers and the MMR
nodes, which are specific for each blockchain. We follow a
more general approach, that is to minimize the total number
of sampled headers. This approach abstracts away from the
specific blockchain and approximates well the minimization
of the proof size in those cases in which the size of the block
headers dominates that of the MMR nodes, like in Zcash.
Following the B¨unz-Kiffer parametrization under a (c, L)-
adversary assumption, the verifier must perform ndet deter-
ministic samplings plus nprob probabilistic ones, with ndet
and nprob chosen as in Eqq. 1 and 2 or Eqq. 3 and 4,
respectively if we are running the interactive or the non-
interactive version of the protocol. Therefore, we find the
(c = c∗, L = L∗) pair that minimizes ndet + nprob, with
L∗≥min

ν
Pn
i=n−ν+1 di ≥wa/c∗ 
. Crucially, in case the
block difficulty has low variability like it happens in Zcash
and other blockchains, we can assume that the average block
difficulty of the last L∗blocks ( ˜d) does not vary with L∗.
In formulas: ∀L∗: 1/L∗· Pn
i=n−L∗+1 di = ˜d. Therefore, the
relation between c∗and L∗simplifies in c∗·L∗= wa/ ˜d ≜na.
We call na the adversarial block budget, which represents
the budget of the adversary measured in terms of number of
blocks instead of amount of work. By formally computing the
derivative of ndet +nprob over c∗and imposing it to zero, we
find that c∗must fulfill the following first-order conditions:
λ(c∗)2 ln 2

−ln c∗
a2c∗−
1
ac∗

= na

1 −ln c∗
a

· ln2

1 −ln c∗
a

,
(6)
for the interactive case, and:

ln b
a · na + c∗

ln b
a·a·b+c∗ln na
n ·(λ ln 2 + ln(c∗· n)) = 0
(7)
for the non-interactive one, where a
=
ln
  na
c∗n

, b
=
ln

na
(c∗)2n

, and c∗∈[0, 1]. The solutions to such equations
are not expressible in closed forms, so they must be found
numerically. Figure 2 shows the trend of c∗with a security
level of λ = 50, and varying the blockchain length and the
adversarial block budget, for both the interactive and non-
interactive protocols. The optimal L∗can then be computed
simply as L∗= na/c∗.
As a concrete example, let us consider a FlyClient verifier
configured with a traditional (c, L)-adversary model with c =
0.5 and L = 100, a target security level λ = 50, and a chain
of 3 million blocks. Breaking such an assumption requires an
expected adversarial block budget of na = c · L = 50 blocks,
which in turn requires an expected budget of Budgeta =
20, 833 USD, as computed in Section IV-A. This configuration
results in an interactive FlyClient proof of 598 total samplings,
and a non-interactive one of 802 total samplings. On the other
hand, by using a wa-adversary model with the same expected
block budget (na = c·L = 50), we obtain an optimal (c∗, L∗)
pair of (0.25, 200) for the interactive FlyClient proof, and of

6
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9
3.1
Chain length (million blocks)
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
c∗
interactive, na = 25
interactive, na = 50
interactive, na = 100
interactive, na = 500
non-interactive, na = 25
non-interactive, na = 50
non-interactive, na = 100
non-interactive, na = 500
Fig. 2.
Optimal c∗for interactive and non-interactive proofs, varying the
blockchain length and the adversarial block budget.
(0.2161, 231) for the non-interactive one. This configuration
results in an interactive proof of 423 samplings and a non-
interactive one of 504 samplings (-37% saving). Considering
that each Zcash header is 1,487 bytes if represented in bi-
nary format, the wa-adversary parametrization decreases the
amount of total header data to download from 598 × 1,487
bytes = 0.848 MiB to 423 × 1,487 bytes = 0.600 MiB for the
interactive case (-29% saving), and from 802 × 1,487 = 1.137
MiB to 504 × 1,487 = 0.715 MiB for the non-interactive one
(-37% saving). Note that this computation does not consider
the MMR nodes that the verifier must download together with
the block headers, but these grow roughly linearly with the
number of samplings, so the percentages of saving should be
confirmed. In Section V we will consider the MMR nodes
too in the FlyClient proof size. This change in the adversary
model does not appear to introduce additional security risks
under the same adversarial budget assumptions, because as
explained above an attacker producing a < 100-block long
fork with 0.5 validity ratio does not have the necessary
budget to violate the (c∗= 0.25, L∗= 200)-adversary or
the (c∗= 0.2161, L∗= 231)-adversary assumptions, so the
verifier also defends against such adversaries.
V. PROVER IMPLEMENTATION
In this section we estimate the extra resources that are
needed for a Zcash full node for offering FlyClient prover
functionalities. To do this, we extended Zebrad3, which is
the Rust-based official full node implementation of Zcash,
developed by the Zcash Foundation as part of the Zebra
project. Zebrad replaces the legacy Zcashd full node imple-
mentation, written in C++ and based on Bitcoin Core, which
became obsolete in 20254. Such a FlyClient-prover extension
of Zebrad may have independent value for future research on
FlyClient, so we made it available to the Zcash community5.
We conveniently chose to put all the protocol’s intelligence
on the verifier side, that is the prover is only a dumb answerer
to the verifier’s requests, performed via Remote Procedure
3https://github.com/ZcashFoundation/zebra (accessed on 25 March 2026).
4https://z.cash/support/zcashd-deprecation/ (accessed on 25 March 2026).
5https://github.com/Metalcape/zcash-flyclient (accessed on 25 March 2026).
Calls (RPCs). Zebrad implements an HTTP-based JSON-RPC
protocol like Bitcoin, by which a client can perform block
queries or send transactions to be included in the blockchain.
The RPC functions that the prover must implement are the
following.
• A function to get the tip header, the number of blocks,
and the total work from the genesis to the tip header. We
used the native function GETBLOCKCHAININFO for this.
• A function to get a block header given its height in
the chain. This is used by the deterministic and the
probabilistic samplings. We used the native function
GETBLOCKHEADER for this.
• A function to get an MMR node given its index. This is
used to retrieve the MMR proofs of the sampled blocks.
We introduced a new function GETHISTORYNODE for
this.
• A function to get the authDataRoot of a block given
its height. This is necessary to allow the verification of
MMR proofs. We introduced a new function GETAUTH-
DATAROOT for this.
• A function to get the total work from the genesis to
a given block height. This is used to retrieve the total
work associated with the oldest deterministically sampled
block, which in turn allows us to compute the probability
distribution by which we perform the probabilistic sam-
pling in case of variable difficulty. We introduced a new
function GETTOTALWORK for this.
• A function to get the height of the first block having the
total work equal to or greater than a given amount. This
is used by probabilistic sampling in case of variable diffi-
culty. We introduced a new function GETHEIGHTWITH-
TOTALWORK for this.
The most resource-consuming RPC function is GETHISTO-
RYNODE, because it needs the prover to maintain a database
of MMR nodes. The current Zebrad implementation lacks
this functionality, and it maintains in memory only a minimal
fraction of MMR nodes, namely the MMR peaks, which are
needed to calculate the chain history root of the next block. We
implemented the routines to populate the MMR nodes database
contextually with the download of the blocks or after it. The
first routine is performed by an entity which installs Zebrad
from scratch. The second routine is performed by an entity
which already has a running Zebrad node synchronized with
the current blockchain, but without prover functionalities, and
it wants to offer such functionalities too. We measured the
time needed to upgrade the database to store the individual
MMR tree nodes and compared it to the time needed to fully
synchronize with the blockchain, with both a legacy and a
FlyClient-capable Zebrad instance. We run the three tests on
the same virtual machine with high-bandwidth network access.
Figure 3 shows the results. The time for a full sync of a
FlyClient-capable Zebrad instance is comparable to a legacy
one. This is because the impact of the generation and writing
of MMR nodes to the database on the total execution time
of the full sync is negligible. The only additional operation
needed by the modified full node is the database write op-
eration, because the nodes already had to be calculated to

7
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
chain length (million blocks)
00:00
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
24:00
27:00
30:00
33:00
36:00
39:00
time elapsed
Heartwood
Canopy
NU5
NU6
full sync (old format)
full sync (new format)
database format upgrade
Fig. 3. Database upgrade time.
keep the HistoryTree of the tip header up to date. Therefore,
FlyClient capability does not introduce sensitive degradation
with respect to the sync time. If a legacy instance with an
old database format gets upgraded, it takes about 10 hours to
upgrade the database to the new format with a chain of about
3M blocks, while a full sync requires almost 40 hours.
It can be seen from the graph that the upgrade time spikes
around 1.5 million blocks. This is due to a “spam attack”
that interested the Zcash blockchain in 2022 and caused
its size to increase greatly. This spam attack impacts also
the database upgrade time, because generating history nodes
requires reading back finalized blocks from the database, and
while the mining rate of the blockchain remains approximately
constant, each block is much larger due to the large number
of transactions caused by the attack. This results in larger
database read times over the span of the attack window. In
general, we can see that outside the spam attack window both
the upgrade time and full sync time increase linearly with the
length of the blockchain, while the full sync time is impacted
by the format change in a negligible way.
Figure 4 shows our reference FlyClient verifier, described
as pseudo-code that uses the aforementioned RPC functions.
The FLYCLIENTVERIFIER function (Figure 4a) tests the trust-
worthiness of a set of verifiers P, starting from the one that
declared the chain with the most work. The CHECKPROVER
function (Figure 4b) tests a single prover p, by first performing
ndet deterministic samplings (Lines 3–9) and then nprob
probabilistic ones (Lines 10–17). In doing this, it maintains
two caches of downloaded headers (H) and MMR nodes
(M), to avoid downloading them multiple times. The SAMPLE-
WORK function (called in Line 12, not shown as pseudo-code)
produces a random number between the two extremes specified
as arguments, using the probability distribution specified by
B¨unz et al. [1] (Theorem 2). Finally, the SAMPLEATHEIGHT
function (Figure 4c) samples a header at a given height h
from prover p, and it is used for the probabilistic sampling
phase. To take into account the MMR reboots at the network
upgrades, it checks if the header to sample lies before the
current consensus branch, and it samples also the initial block
of the current consensus branch in case (Lines 3–8). We take
into consideration also variants to this verifier, but we will
1: function FLYCLIENTVERIFIER(P, ndet, nprob)
2:
for all p ∈P do
3:
(np, wp, tp) ←p.GETBLOCKCHAININFO()
4:
end for
5:
for all p ∈P in decreasing order of wp do
6:
if CHECKPROVER(p, np, tp, ndet, nprob) then
7:
return (p, np, wp, tp)
8:
end if
9:
end for
10:
return ⊥
11: end function
(a) FlyClient verifier
1: function CHECKPROVER(p, n, t, ndet, nprob)
2:
H ←∅, M ←∅
3:
for h = n −ndet −1, . . . , n do
4:
B ←p.GETBLOCKHEADER(h)
5:
if invalid difficulty transition in B or invalid PoW in B or B not
chained to t then
6:
return false
7:
end if
8:
H[h] ←B
9:
end for
10:
wdet ←p.GETTOTALWORK(n −ndet −1)
11:
for j = 1, . . . , nprob do
12:
x ←SAMPLEWORK(0, wdet)
13:
h ←p.GETHEIGHTWITHTOTALWORK(x)
14:
if not SAMPLEATHEIGHT(p, h, t, H, M) then
15:
return false
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
return true
19: end function
(b) Checking a prover
1: functi

[…middle truncated for length…]

tion is of course not recommendable for IoT
applications that must save bandwidth. In every representation,
the majority of such proof sizes is constituted by Equihash
solutions, each of which takes 1344 bytes under the binary
representation. All the proof sizes follow logarithmic trends,
with the zipped representation being around 1.2 MiB at 3
million blocks, which were completed on July 20, 2025. Note
that the various MMR rebootings due to the network upgrades
have little impact on the proof sizes, as they perturb almost
negligibly its logarithmic trend.
Fig. 6 shows the size of the non-interactive proof under the
same three representations, varying the length of the chain.
This time, in the zipped representation we applied the gzip
compression algorithm over the whole proof, rather than the
single MMR nodes and block headers. This is to emulate a
realistic use case in which an interactive proof is downloaded
by separate HTTP requests, so it is compressed piece-wise,
while a non-interactive proof is sent as a unique compressed
file. All the proof sizes confirm the logarithmic trends and the
little impacts of network upgrades. The JSON and the binary
representations are some hundreds of KiB larger than their
interactive counterparts, which constitutes the cost of the non-
interactiveness. On the other hand, the zipped representation
reaches quite the same size of the interactive counterpart, that
is 1.2 MiB at 3 million blocks. This probably stems from the
better effectiveness of the compression when applied to the
proof as a whole. Assuming an hypothetical trustless bridge
application, a FlyClient proof should be passed to a smart
contract, possibly fragmented in several method calls. There-
fore, the proof size translates directly to a monetary cost. After
the Pectra hard fork of May 2025, a data-heavy transaction is
charged using the EIP-7623 [14], which specifies 40 gas per
non-zero byte of calldata. Therefore, passing a FlyClient proof

9
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9
chain length (million blocks)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
proof size (MiB)
Heartwood
Canopy
NU5
NU6
reference veriﬁer
ﬁxed-diﬃculty veriﬁer
cache-less veriﬁer
Fig. 7. FlyClient proof size with respect to the type of verifier.
of 1.2 MiB to a smart contract takes approximately 50,340,000
gas. Considering a gas price of 0.125 Gwei per gas6 and an
ETH price of 2,100 USD per ETH7, this takes 50,340,000 ×
0.125 × 10−9 × 2,100 = 13.21 USD. In other words, we
are using only 13.21 USD to defend against an adversary
that employs 20,833 USD. This should be acceptable for
infrequent high-value cross-chain transfers, but less acceptable
for frequent or low-value ones. In Section VI we will see how
to decrease the proof size and thus the gas cost of a trustless
bridge. Note that we do not consider to store the FlyClient
proof as EIP-4844 blobs [15]. This is on purpose, because even
if blobs would dramatically decrease the costs, they would
also weaken the trust model. Indeed, a smart contract cannot
directly access blob data, therefore validators would not check
the proof to be correct. From now on, we will consider the
zipped representation only, as it is the more efficient one and
it has no side costs on other aspects.
Fig. 7 shows the size of the proof with the three verifiers,
represented in zipped binary format, varying the length of the
chain. We can see that the proof size of the fixed-difficulty
verifier closely follows the one of the reference verifier. This
can be explained by the fact that PoW difficulty has increased
quite slowly in Zcash, so sampling blocks based on their
height turns out to be quite similar to doing it based on
their cumulative work. On the other hand, the proofs of the
non-cached verifier are sensibly bigger than the ones of the
reference verifier. The proof size of this verifier is also non-
monotone with the length of the chain, as its plot presents
peaks and valleys. This can be explained by the fact that the
non-cached verifier must download multiple times the peak
nodes of the “old” mountains of the MMR, whose number
changes in a non-monotone way with the chain length. For
example, an MMR covering 255 blocks has 8 peak nodes,
while an MMR covering just one more block has only 1 peak
node. In the reference verifier this phenomenon also happens,
but its effect is mitigated by the node caching, that allows the
6https://etherscan.io/gastracker (accessed on 7 April 2026). These values
are taken as a snapshot and may vary over time.
7https://etherscan.io/gastracker (accessed on 7 April 2026).
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
2.7
2.9
chain length (million blocks)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
proof size (MiB)
Heartwood
Canopy
NU5
NU6
reference veriﬁer
ﬁxed-diﬃculty veriﬁer
Fig. 8. Non-interactive FlyClient proof size with respect to the type of verifier.
verifier to download the peak nodes of the old mountains only
once.
Fig. 8 shows the size of the non-interactive proof with the
reference and the fixed-difficulty verifiers, varying the length
of the chain. We omitted the cache-less verifier here because it
does not apply to non-interactive proofs. All the general trends
of the interactive proofs (see Fig. 7) are confirmed. Even here,
the proof size of the fixed-difficulty verifier closely follows the
one of the reference verifier.
VI. OPTIMIZATIONS
We introduce here two optimizations of the reference veri-
fier of Fig. 4 that aim at minimizing the size of the interactive
and non-interactive proofs. The objective is to improve the
bandwidth efficiency of IoT devices that execute the interactive
FlyClient protocol, but also to minimize the cost of storing
a non-interactive FlyClient proof on a smart contracts for
trustless bridge applications. The two optimizations are as
follows: (1) cumulative proof, which consists in downloading a
single MMR proof that proves the inclusion in the blockchain
of all the sampled blocks altogether, and (2) distilled proof,
which requires a change in the consensus algorithm specifi-
cally aimed at saving FlyClient proof size. We describe them
both in the following sections.
A. Cumulative Proof
The FlyClient proof as currently described by the literature
[1]–[3] and downloaded by the reference verifier of Fig. 4
is suboptimal from the size point of view. The reason is
that, in many cases, the verifier downloads nodes that were
computable offline from other already downloaded nodes or
headers. As an example, let us consider the toy MMR of Fig.
9, and let us assume that the sampled headers are B3 and B6.
The reference verifier would download separately the ancestry
proof relative to B3 and that relative to B6. Both proofs consist
of four nodes, respectively 2, 3, 13, 17, 18 for the B3’s proof
and 6, 9, 11, 17, 18 for the B6’s one. Considering that nodes
17 and 18 are cached after the download of the first proof, the

10
0
1
3
4
7
8
10
11
15
16
18
2
5
9
12
17
6
13
14
B0
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
B8
B9
B10
Fig. 9. Example of cumulative proof of ancestry.
total number of nodes downloaded by the reference verifier
is 8. However, some of these nodes were computable from
others. For example, node 6 was computable from nodes 2, 3,
and the hash of header B3. Similarly, node 13 was computable
from nodes 9, 11, and the hash of header B6. To capture this
optimization, we introduce the concept of cumulative ancestry
proof.
Given a set of sampled headers, their cumulative ancestry
proof is constituted by the minimal set of nodes that covers
only the spaces between the sampled headers. In the example
of Fig. 9, the cumulative ancestry proof consists of nodes 2,
3, 9, 11, 17, 18 (the green MMR nodes in the figure). A
verifier that downloads the cumulative ancestry proof will thus
download 6 nodes instead of 8. It is easy to show that we can
reconstruct the chain history roots relative to the top header
and to all the sampled headers from the sampled headers
themselves plus their cumulative ancestry proof. In addition, it
is possible to check the plausibility of the difficulty variations
from the cumulative ancestry proof, since it covers the whole
blockchain. Thus, the cumulative ancestry proof is an efficient
replacement for the singular ancestry proofs of the sampled
blocks, and it has no side costs on other aspects. Note that this
optimization decreases the number of nodes to be downloaded
by the verifier, but it does not decrease the size of both nodes
and headers. To do this, we must change their format, which
in turn implies a change in the consensus algorithm. This will
be the aim of the second optimization.
B. Distilled Proof
The current format of the Zcash headers is particularly
inefficient for deploying FlyClient verifiers. This is mainly
because each header contains an Equihash solution, which
occupies 1344 bytes. Hence, the verifier must download at
least (ndet +nprob)·1344 bytes. The situation would improve
if Zcash used a different PoW function, for example a double-
SHA256 like Bitcoin, which does not require to store any
solution inside headers. The reason why Zcash uses Equihash
is to obtain a certain degree of ASIC-resistance, due to the
memory-hardness of Equihash. However, other memory-hard
hash functions have been designed, which do not require
solution storage, for example Argon2 and its variants [16].
The Zcash community is evaluating to replace Equihash with
other more space-efficient hashes8, but no consensus has been
reached yet.
A distilled proof is a cumulative proof that also minimizes
the quantity of data that a FlyClient verifier must download to
perform all the necessary checks. This requires applying three
modifications to the current Zcash consensus algorithm, so it is
not immediately deployable. First, the memory-hard problem
must be changed in such a way to admit small solutions.
As we said before, an Equihash solution is 1344 bytes in
size, and it must be included in each header downloaded by
the verifier to allow the verifier to check its correctness. The
most radical choice would be to get rid of the memory-hard
problem so that no solution needs to be stored in the headers.
The Bitcoin consensus works in this way. Of course, this
choice would jeopardize completely the ASIC-resistance of the
consensus. If we want to save ASIC-resistance, a trade-off is
to adopt a memory-hard problem that requires small solutions,
like Ethash [17] adopted by the pre-Merge Ethereum and by
Ethereum Classic9, or RandomX10 adopted by Monero. We
assume to adopt Ethash as a PoW algorithm, whose memory-
hard problem solution (called mixhash) is 32 bytes only. In
this way, a Zcash header will decrease from 1487 bytes to
175.
The second modification requires that the final hash whose
result is compared to the target is computed not on the header,
but on its hash plus those fields that are strictly necessary
to the FlyClient protocol, that are the memory-hard problem
solution, the chain history root, the target, and the timestamp.
This allows the verifier to avoid downloading the actual header,
but only a “distilled” version of it, which includes all the
fields necessary to perform the FlyClient checks. Assuming
to use SHA-256 to compute the header’s hash, each distilled
Zcash header will decrease again from 175 bytes to 104.
Note that this trick is applicable to the generic PoW-consensus
cryptocurrency, making it “FlyClient-friendly” with virtually
no cost. Note also that the header distillation can boost the
performance of SPV light clients too, since they can download
the distilled headers instead of the full ones. Of course, in this
case each distilled header must also contain an extra 32-byte
field for the previous block’s hash.
The third modification requires that the MMR nodes are
“distilled” too, in the sense that they contain the fields strictly
necessary to the FlyClient protocol, and only a hash of the
other fields. Indeed, the fields necessary for FlyClient are
child nodes’ hash, the start and the end heights, the start
and the end difficulties, the start and the end timestamps,
and the cumulative work. Zcash MMR nodes contain some
additional fields which are not strictly necessary for the
FlyClient checks, which are the start and the end Sapling roots,
8https://gist.github.com/zmanian/adb4d41a725fe64ccfeb9a435e6d22bd (ac-
cessed on 25-03-2026).
9https://ethereumclassic.org/ (accessed on 25-03-2026).
10https://github.com/tevador/RandomX/blob/master/doc/specs.md (accessed
on 25-03-2026).

11
0.9
1.7
2.5
1.1
1.9
2.7
1.3
2.1
2.9
1.5
2.3
chain length (million blocks)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
proof size (MiB)
Heartwood
Canopy
NU5
NU6
unoptimized proof
cumulative proof
distilled proof
Fig. 10. FlyClient proof size under different optimizations.
the number of Sapling transactions, and from NU5 onward the
start and the end Orchard roots, and the number of Orchard
transactions. Hashing the unnecessary fields allow the verifier
to avoid downloading them during the FlyClient protocol, and
to download them afterwards if interested. Assuming to use
SHA-256 to compute the fields’ hash, each distilled MMR
node will decrease from 244 bytes to 140.
C. Experimental Evaluation
In this section we experimentally evaluate the performance
improvements carried by the previously described optimiza-
tions to the size of the FlyClient proof. Fig. 10 shows the
interactive proof size of the reference verifier represented in
zipped binary format respectively without any optimization,
with cumulative proof, and with cumulative distilled proof,
varying the length of the chain.
For the distilled proof, we simulated that the modifications
to the PoW consensus algorithm were applied just after the
Heartwood network upgrade, so that we can conveniently
compare the distilled proof with the other proofs. In a real de-
ployment, consensus modifications would be applied during a
future network upgrade, but the performance improvement will
be eventually the same. It can be seen that the cumulative proof
carries only a measurable but moderate reduction of the proof
size, while the distilled one carries a bigger improvement. Of
course, the downside of the distilled proof is that it requires a
hard fork, while the cumulative proof is applicable just now
without changing anything in the consensus algorithm. Fig.
11 shows the non-interactive proof size, varying the length of
the chain. All the trends of the interactive proof are roughly
confirmed. Note that the increase in proof size due to the
non-interactiveness is well compensated by the whole-proof
compression. The cumulative proof saves less space than in
the interactive case. This can be explained because the whole-
proof compression is already very efficient in saving space.
A non-interactive cumulative proof is below 1.09 MiB with 3
million blocks, which takes approximately 45,720,000 gas to
pass it to a smart contract for trustless bridge applications,
equivalent to 12.00 USD (-9.16% compared to not using
0.9
1.7
2.5
1.1
1.9
2.7
1.3
2.1
2.9
1.5
2.3
chain length (million blocks)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
proof size (MiB)
Heartwood
Canopy
NU5
NU6
unoptimized proof
cumulative proof
distilled proof
Fig. 11. Non-interactive FlyClient proof size under different optimizations.
cumulative proofs). The non-interactive distilled proofs are
even smaller than the interactive ones. As an example, a non-
interactive distilled proof of a chain with 3 million blocks
is 320 KiB, which takes approximately 13,110,000 gas to
pass it to a smart contract, equivalent to 3.44 USD (-71.33%
compared to cumulative proofs without distillation).
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper takes a concrete step toward bridging the gap
between the theoretical design of FlyClient and its practical
deployment in real-world blockchain systems. We addressed
both modeling and implementation challenges, providing in-
sights that are directly relevant for production environments.
First, we introduced the wa-adversary model as an alternative
to the classical (c, L)-adversary. By expressing the adversary
in terms of an economic budget, the model offers a more
intuitive and deployment-oriented perspective, enabling prac-
titioners to parametrize FlyClient verifiers through a single,
interpretable parameter. We also showed how such a model can
be used to derive verifier configurations via an optimization
procedure, which saves some proof size as side effect. Second,
we designed and implemented a FlyClient prover for the
Zcash blockchain by extending the Zebrad full node. Our
implementation demonstrates that FlyClient functionalities can
be integrated into an existing production-grade system with
negligible impact on synchronization time, while requiring
only moderate additional storage. This provides, to the best of
our knowledge, the first end-to-end evaluation of FlyClient in a
real PoW blockchain. We also analyzed the size of interactive
and non-interactive FlyClient proofs under different represen-
tations and verifier variants, highlighting the dominant impact
of block header components (notably Equihash solutions) on
proof size. Third, we proposed two optimizations: cumulative
proofs, which reduce redundancy in ancestry proofs without
protocol changes, and distilled proofs, which significantly
decrease proof size at the cost of some modifications to
the consensus layer. Our experimental evaluation shows that
distilled proofs can reduce non-interactive proof sizes to a few

12
hundred KiB, making on-chain verification even more eco-
nomically viable. Overall, our results indicate that FlyClient
is a promising building block for applications such as trustless
cross-chain bridges and lightweight verification in constrained
environments. In future work, we plan to study the application
of SNARKs to non-interactive FlyClient proofs, to make them
even more compact and efficient from the verifier point of
view.