Hidden Secrets in the arXiv: Discovering, Analyzing, and Preventing
Unintentional Information Disclosure in Source Files of Scientific Preprints
Jan Pennekamp∗,§, Johannes Lohmöller∗,§, David Schütte∗, Joscha Loos∗, Martin Henze‡,¶
∗Communication and Distributed Systems, RWTH Aachen University, Germany · {lastname}@comsys.rwth-aachen.de
‡Security and Privacy in Industrial Cooperation, RWTH Aachen University, Germany · {lastname}@spice.rwth-aachen.de
Abstract—Preprints are essential for the timely and open
dissemination of research. arXiv, the most widely used preprint
service, takes the idea of open science one step further by not
only publishing the actual preprints but also LATEX sources and
other files used to create them. As known from other contexts,
such as GitHub repositories, and anecdotally exemplified for
arXiv, making source code publicly available risks disclosing
otherwise “hidden” information. Consequently, the public
availability of paper sources raises the question of how much
sensitive content is (unintentionally) disclosed through them.
In this paper, we systematically answer this question for
all 2.7 M arXiv submissions with available source files across
three dimensions of source file-induced information disclosure:
1 inclusion of unnecessary files, 2 metadata embedded in files,
and 3 irrelevant content in files such as source code comments.
Our analysis reveals that nearly every arXiv submission contains
some form of “hidden” information. Notable findings range
from links to editable web documents for internal coordination
over API and private keys to complete Git histories.
While different tools promise to remove such information
from source files, we show that they fail to reliably achieve the
intended cleaning functionality. To mitigate this situation, we
provide ALC-NG to comprehensively remove files, metadata,
and comments that are not needed to compile a LATEX paper.
Index Terms—information disclosure; source code; LATEX; arXiv
1. Introduction
Preprints, i.e., early versions of academic papers al-
ready made available before formal peer review [1], are an
indispensable tool for the timely and open dissemination
of academic research, with first research fields such as
machine learning even shifting to a preprint-first “publication”
model [2]. Since its inception in 1991 [1], arXiv [3] has
established itself as the largest and most frequently used
preprint service [4] and is widely accepted in disciplines
such as computer science, physics, and mathematics, with
>20 000 preprints published every month [5]. In addition to
the PDF of the preprint, arXiv also publishes the source code
of all papers written using LATEX (≈93 % of submissions).
While initially intended to enable the reuse of notations and
provide learning opportunities [6], publishing preprint source
§. Equal contribution.
¶. Also with Fraunhofer FKIE.
main.tex
reviews.pdf
whiteboard-notes.jpg
article.cls
An Example Academic Paper in LATEX
Alice Smith1
Bob Johnson2
1Department of Computer Science, Example University, Country
2Institute of Data Science, Example Institute, Country
Abstract
This document serves as a boilerplate example of how an academic article might look when
written in LATEX. It contains sections commonly found in journal papers, including an introduc-
tion, related work, methodology, results, discussion, and conclusion. All information is presented
in narrative paragraphs, without the use of equations, tables, or ﬁgures.
1
Introduction
In addition to providing context, the introduction sets expectations for the reader. It emphasizes
why the research is relevant at this particular time and how it contributes to the broader academic
conversation. By situating the work within a larger discourse, the introduction ensures that the
study is understood as part of an ongoing dialogue rather than an isolated e!ort.
2
Related Work
The related work section situates the paper within the existing literature. Authors summarize
previous studies, compare approaches, and discuss how earlier research has shaped current under-
standing. In some cases, the emphasis is placed on identifying shortcomings or unresolved issues
in prior work [2]. This sets the stage for the methodology that follows.
Often, related work is organized thematically or chronologically, helping readers trace the devel-
opment of ideas over time. Highlighting both consensus and disagreement in the literature provides
a nuanced view of the ﬁeld and clariﬁes how the present work either builds on or challenges estab-
lished perspectives.
3
Methodology
This section describes the approach taken to address the research problem. It may involve outlining
theoretical frameworks, explaining experimental design, or detailing procedures for data collection
and analysis.
Rather than presenting technical formulas or diagrams, the explanation remains
descriptive and focuses on the reasoning behind each step.
A strong methodology section also justiﬁes the choices made by the researchers. It explains
why a particular method was selected, how it aligns with the research objectives, and what alter-
natives were considered. Transparency in methodological decisions enhances the credibility and
reproducibility of the work.
1
[..] By situating the work within a larger 
discourse, the introduction ensures that the 
study is understood as part of an ongoing 
dialogue rather than an isolated effort.
\section{Related Work}
% IF WE DON'T MENTION ANY 
APPLICATIONS, IS IT REALLY 
APPROPRIATE TO SAY THIS?
The related work section situates the paper 
within the existing literature. Authors 
summarize previous studies, compare approaches, 
and discuss how earlier research has shaped 
current understanding. [..]
LaTeX Sources
PDF File
Build
Figure 1. LATEX sources might contain comments or dangling files that are
irrelevant to or unused in the compiled PDF, respectively. When being
distributed regardless, e.g., via arXiv, they disclose (sensitive) information.
code enables research such as citation prediction [7], studying
inconsistencies in documents produced using LATEX [8], or
reconstructing LATEX sources from PDFs [9], [10].
However, besides providing many benefits [11], making
the source code of academic papers publicly available also
introduces substantial information disclosure risks [6]. As
exemplarily highlighted in Fig. 1, the two main risks stem
from (i) irrelevant content, e.g., in the comment sections
of LATEX files, and (ii) unused files within the uploaded
archive that are not needed to build the paper. Notably, these
risks come on top of information disclosure through metadata
embedded in the papers themselves, which is well known and
researched [12]–[18]. To the larger public, the risks specific
to publishing sources of preprints were first anecdotally
mentioned on Twitter/X [19]. However, the underlying issue
gained wider attention when a paper on GPT-4 purposefully
omitted details concerning its toxicity probability and how
it complies with intellectual property laws [20].
Still, despite arXiv maintaining its own build pipeline and
warning about corresponding issues [6], proactive mitigation
of those issues at scale seems to be lacking. While arXiv
endorses [6] Google’s arxiv_latex_cleaner (ALC) [21], [22]—
a tool claiming to “easily clean the LATEX code of [..]
paper[s]”—it does not enforce any actions on the submitting
authors. Similarly, while anecdotal evidence and a few
academic works [23], [24] hint at the issue of unintentionally
distributing comments and other data through LATEX source
files, a detailed analysis of the prevalence and scale of
security problems associated with the distribution of papers’
sources is lacking. However, the lack of understanding these
arXiv:2604.20927v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

problems challenges us in assessing respective risks, notifying
affected users, and taking informed countermeasures.
Tackling this research gap, we set out to quantify the
prevalence of “hidden” information, including sensitive data,
within all LATEX sources published by arXiv. In particular, we
consider the availability of unused (dangling) files, embedded
metadata, and compilation-irrelevant content (e.g., comments
in LATEX files) to get a holistic picture. Indeed, our findings
show that “hidden” information within arXiv is a widespread
issue: 88 % of papers with LATEX sources are affected by at
least one type of “hidden” information, making information
available for everyone to “discover” and potentially exploit.
Our analysis reveals substantial amounts of content that were
either not meant for distribution or should not be publicly
distributed, including reviewer comments, author discussions,
survey data with personally identifiable information (PII), as
well as links to internal documents and reports without any
restrictive access control. Perhaps surprisingly, papers related
to top-tier security conferences contain significantly more
“hidden” information, despite this community’s expectable
awareness of such issues. Overall, the prevalence of issues
concerning sensitive information prompted us to initiate two
responsible disclosure campaigns (cf. Appendix A).
Contributions. To provide a profound understanding of
the prevalence and severity of “hidden” information within
arXiv submissions, better assess corresponding risks, and lay
the foundation for mitigations, our main contributions are:
• We present a methodology to reliably detect irrelevant
content in LATEX sources and identify unused files. Unlike
current mitigation approaches that solely rely on heuris-
tics, our approach utilizes an abstract syntax tree and
pdflatex’s recorder option for precise identification of
potentially critical “hidden” information (Section 4).
• We conduct the first large-scale analysis of “hidden” infor-
mation within preprint sources based on a comprehensive
dataset of LATEX sources at arXiv (Section 5), covering all
2.7 M submissions with source files.
• We reveal that the majority (88 %) of papers feature (un-
necessary) information within their arXiv submission, with
striking findings such as secrets (API tokens, private keys,
passwords), sensitive content (links to internal documents,
disclosure of FTP and SSH servers), and uncommented text
fragments and discussions among coauthors (Section 6).
• To address the identified serious and prevalent issues, we
develop and release ALC-NG—an improved LATEX cleaner
that reliably prevents “hidden” information distribution,
mitigating 90 % of “hidden” information issues (Section 7).
Open Science Statement. We are committed to open sci-
ence and thus publish aggregated data of our evaluation [25].
We also release our LATEX source file cleaner—ALC-NG—for
public use [26]. In compliance with our ethical considerations
(Appendix A), we refrain from publishing our analysis code.
2. Preprint Repositories and arXiv.org
In academia, a preprint corresponds to a scientific paper
that is distributed prior to peer review or official publi-
cation [1], [4], [27]. While they can be shared any time,
around 40 % of preprints get (finally) formally published [4].
Independent projects (see DOAPR [28], the directory of open
access preprint repositories, for an overview) collect preprints
on specific domains, e.g., bioRxiv and medRxiv, or for
specific purposes, establishing different preprint repositories.
Some, such as SSRN or TechRxiv, are even operated and/or
endorsed by academic publishers. In 2021, Xie et al. [4]
studied the use of preprint repositories, particularly noting the
popularity of arXiv [3] and identifying a substantial increase
in usage in computer science over the past few years.
Established in 1991 to consolidate the then prevalent
preprint sharing via email in physics research [1], arXiv [3]
has evolved into a free, open-access preprint repository,
hosting more than 2.9 M research papers [5] of differ-
ent domains [29], including natural sciences, computer
science, quantitative finance, electrical engineering, and
economics. The importance of preprints has been established
decades ago [30], [31], and the observed growth is domain-
independent, i.e., it also holds for computer security [32].
Since its inception, both the number of submissions and
downloads have been increasing continuously [5], [29], [33].
The general submission process at arXiv works as follows.
After writing the paper, an author creates a submission by
uploading the LATEX sources of the paper. arXiv then compiles
the sources and conducts some basic checks to verify whether
the paper is eligible for inclusion. This process is not a proper
peer review, but rather a means for maintaining quality within
the repository [29], [34]. Upon successful vetting, the paper
is publicly announced, and a permanent, versioned record is
created. After the initial announcement, authors can decide
to upload a new, improved (corrected) version that amends
the original record or withdraw a version for all kinds of
reasons [35]. In the latter case, arXiv still retains the original
submission but adds a dedicated notice of withdrawal.
For different reasons [6], including accessibility and
improved long-term maintainability, arXiv requires authors
to submit LATEX sources if available. Accordingly, more than
90 % of submissions are distributed with their sources [11].
3. Related Work
Research analyzing arXiv has largely focused on non-
security aspects, such as (i) studying how academic papers are
written using LATEX [23], [24], (ii) understanding the impact
of arXiv submissions [36] and the influence of preprints on ci-
tations [36]–[41], (iii) conducting analyses of authorship and
publication forms [42]–[47], (iv) detecting plagiarism [48],
text reuse [49], and AI-generated texts [50], (v) collecting
reasons for withdrawing preprints [35], (vi) training and
evaluating language models [51]–[53], and (vii) reconstruct-
ing LATEX sources [54], analyzing document layouts [55], or
extracting content from LATEX-compiled PDFs [56].
However, despite enabling all these diverse research
streams, publishing sources of LATEX documents inevitably
carries the risk of unintended information disclosure [6]. In-
deed, related work analyzing source code in GitHub reposito-
ries [57]–[61], Docker containers [62], and mobile apps [63]
has identified a substantial risk of disclosing information such

as secret API keys, private keys, or passwords. Consequently,
different tools to sanitize LATEX documents before publishing
them on arXiv have been developed [6], [21], [64]–[66].
While we refer to Section 7.1 for a detailed survey of those
tools and their capabilities in accurately sanitizing LATEX
documents, anecdotal evidence of (remaining) critical content
in sources of arXiv submissions [19], [20], [23], [24] suggests
that these tools are either not widely applied or ineffective
in removing (all) critical content.
Looking beyond source files, information leakage result-
ing from published documents such as PDF files [13], [16]–
[18], images [67], [68], and other formats [12], [14], [15] has
been analyzed, uncovering several common issues, including
GPS locations where images were taken, author names, and
other (partially) private information unintentionally stored
primarily in metadata fields. To our understanding, these
issues of “hidden” information in published documents are
well-researched and well-understood, with practical tools for
metadata removal being available [69]–[71]. Further work
has focused on detecting malicious PDFs [72]–[74], which
is only partly applicable to arXiv-published papers given
its service-provided build pipeline, or the identification of
privacy issues within PDF-based publication processes [75].
Consequently, research is well aware that “hidden” in-
formation in documents, including metadata, can be a threat
as it may unintentionally reveal sensitive details, e.g., GPS
locations in images or author details in rich text documents.
At the same time, we have arXiv—the largest and most
popular preprint service—which, in contrast to most other
preprint services, requires and publicly distributes author-
submitted LATEX source files. Despite selective attention on
the Web [19], [20] and in academia [23], [24] as well as
warnings issued by arXiv [6], research has not yet assessed
the prevalence of this phenomenon at scale. Concurrent to
our work, two preprints with specific foci—a LLM-driven
security audit of source files [76] and assessing the content
of nonrequired files within sources [77]—also study LATEX
source files, albeit at significantly smaller scale. Still, they
highlight and emphasize the relevance of our research.
4. Methodology For Analyzing LATEX Sources
The goal of our work is to discover, quantify, and
analyze the distribution of “hidden” information at the
popular preprint service arXiv. These findings also serve
as a foundation for mitigation strategies to prevent the
inclusion of “hidden” information. In line with research in
other contexts (Section 3), we identify three key dimensions
of “hidden” information in arXiv submissions: 1 LATEX
sources bundled with dangling files, 2 embedded metadata,
and 3 content/text irrelevant to the build process.
In the following, we present our methodology to compre-
hensively uncover “hidden” information across these three
dimensions with high accuracy to lay the foundation for
analyzing arXiv submissions and their source files at scale.
Dimensions of “Hidden” Information. Our methodol-
ogy for discovering “hidden” information aligns with the
three dimensions along which such information can occur.
1 File Level. At the file level, we classify source files
as either required or dangling files. Required files are strictly
needed to compile the LATEX sources into a PDF document,
while dangling files are not used during the build process
and thus do not need to be part of the served sources.
We align our detection of dangling files with arXiv’s
long-used submission system (version 1.0). That is, we
mark all LATEX root files with documentclass or
documentstyle as required and then recursively mark
all additionally included files as required. We further support
00README(.XXX) files [78], present in 8.8 % of all arXiv
submissions with sources, in which authors may optionally
provide additional information to the submission system, e.g.,
to override arXiv’s default inclusion behavior for files.
2 Metadata Level. Most file types further support the
inclusion of metadata to add supplementary information and
provenance data. Since related work (cf. Section 3) has
shown that metadata may leak sensitive information [79],
we rigorously analyze all source files using exiftool [69].
3 Content/Text Level. Besides content within required
files that is needed to produce the PDF document, source
files on arXiv can also contain irrelevant content with no
influence on the compiled PDF. In this regard, LATEX source
files (beyond other file types) are especially relevant given
their intentional support for author-supplied comments [23]—
a common practice in (academic) writing.
To identify irrelevant content in LATEX sources, our
methodology relies on an abstract syntax tree representation
of said LATEX document using a tree-sitter [80] grammar.
Harnessing this structured representation of LATEX documents,
we can reliably parse and extract irrelevant content, e.g.,
comments, by specifying the different ways irrelevant content
can be embedded in LATEX sources. This approach fundamen-
tally differs from the current state of the art in sanitization
tools (cf. Section 7.1), which rely on heuristic approaches
based on regexes. To ensure comprehensive coverage of the
different concepts of embedding comments, we survey the
treatment of irrelevant information by six state-of-the-art
LATEX sanitization tools (cf. Section 7.1) and supplement
these findings with our own experience from authoring more
than one hundred academic papers with various research
groups across three continents.
Syntax of Embedded Comments. Using this approach,
we derive four widely-used and commonly-known concepts
for embedding comments in LATEX documents that we
employ to detect irrelevant content: A standard LATEX line
comments preluded by % or wrapped in a comment envi-
ronment, B any characters outside of LATEX’s document
environment, C non-taken branches of (custom) if state-
ments, and D ignored arguments of (re)newcommand,
providecommand, Declare*, or def constructions.
Complementing the content-level dimension, we further
consider all content in dangling files as irrelevant.
Given LATEX’s expressiveness, we may theoretically miss
other irrelevant content that does not match the syntax de-
scribed above; for example, csname constructions to insert
content or author-implemented conditionals. However, our
investigation into the usage frequency of custom commands

did not reveal meaningful findings. Thus, such practices seem
rare within arXiv sources, i.e., they are not used at scale.
Handling Multiple Versions of a Submission. When
analyzing arXiv papers, multiple versions (i.e., updates) of a
single paper must be considered (cf. Section 2). Issues present
in one version may not be part of another version of the same
paper (either the issue gets introduced in a later version or
removed during an update). To avoid overcounting “hidden”
information, we thus perform a worst-case aggregation over
versions. That is, we consider an issue to be present for a
given paper if we discover it in at least one version, not
necessarily the most recent one. As the sources of older
versions remain accessible for anyone, this approach is
reasonable and accurately quantifies information leakage.
Validity. By relying on a structured parsing approach
based on an abstract syntax tree (instead of relying on
heuristics, e.g., based on regular expressions), our approach
intentionally constitutes an accurate lower bound of detected
irrelevant content. Furthermore, as our coverage of the
different concepts of embedding comments relies on best
practices from existing sanitization tools and extensive
authoring experience, we are convinced that we capture the
vast majority of irrelevant content. While LATEX, as a Turing-
complete language, theoretically offers additional custom
approaches for embedding comments, as part of our analysis,
we did not discover such peculiarities at scale and thus
estimate their prevalence to be negligible in practice. As
such, our assessment methodology (a) reasonably minimizes
false negatives (undetected irrelevant content), and (b) yields
almost no false positives (relevant content falsely flagged as
irrelevant). Alongside turning our comprehensive detection
methodology into a next-generation sanitization approach
(cf. Section 7.3), we will show that our abstract syntax tree-
based approach outperforms all existing sanitization tools in
simultaneously minimizing false negatives and false positives
while not visually changing compiled documents.
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to apply a
methodological approach to assess the prevalence of “hidden”
information in LATEX source files at scale. Our methodology
ensures an assessment that minimizes false positives, i.e.,
we do not label content as irrelevant if it is strictly needed
when compiling the PDF from source. In contrast, although
covering all prevalent approaches to embed irrelevant content,
our approach does not guarantee completeness; rare custom
cases might be missed. Consequently, our results constitute
a reliable lower bound of discovered “hidden” information.
5. Dataset Covering All arXiv LATEX Sources
For our analysis, we have curated a dataset covering
the source files of all arXiv submissions from its launch
in 1991 up to and including 12/2025. For 1991–10/2020,
we retrieved the archive.org collection [81]. To retrieve the
remaining months and fill any gaps, we relied on the official
arxiv-bulk dataset access over Amazon S3 storage [82]. Since
these sources only serve one version of a paper, we further
sampled full version histories using the official arXiv API
while complying with their rate limits (cf. Appendix A).
2000
2010
2020
0
100k
200k
Annual submissions [#]
Total submissions
With sources
% with sources
60
70
80
90
100
Share with sources [%]
Figure 2. Annual volume of arXiv submissions with and without sources.
After retrieval, we validated the completeness of our
dataset: (i) we iterated over the paper ID space to check
for gaps (some IDs are not associated with a submission),
(ii) we marked all withdrawn versions and papers (similar
to WithdrarXiv [35]), and (iii) we verified that submissions
without source files in our dataset are indeed without sources.
For the latter two steps, we were in contact with arXiv.
In total, our dataset covers 2.7 M papers with source
files, which corresponds to 93 % of all papers on arXiv.
Fig. 2 shows their distribution over the years, with 2013
representing the relative lower bound (91 %) and 1991 the
upper bound (100 %). Across the papers with source files,
we sampled 1.1 M papers with more than one version with
source files, accumulating to a total of 4.3 M versions.
6. Analysis of arXiv Source Files at Scale
Our dataset of all 2.7 M submissions with available source
files published on arXiv (by the end of 2025) enables us to
discover and analyze “hidden” information within sources
made available by arXiv and thus derive a comprehensive
picture of the prevalence of unintentional information disclo-
sure in source files of scientific preprints. To this end, we first
provide a high-level overview of our findings, summarizing
frequent types of “hidden” information and reporting changes
over the years, arXiv categories, and submitted paper versions
(Section 6.1). Subsequently, we attribute our findings to the
different dimensions of the problem (cf. Section 4) and
sequentially discuss them in greater detail (Section 6.2).
We focus on assessing the prevalence of “hidden” in-
formation and grasping its sensitivity. Consequently, the
implications of content-specific changes over time, e.g., the
removal or addition of authors, the effects of changing
templates, or the creation of citation graphs, which related
work already covered partly (cf. Section 3)—albeit at a
comparatively small scale—are not in our scope.
6.1. A Birds-Eye View at “Hidden” Information
We begin our analysis by examining the rate of “hidden”
information at the file, metadata, and content/text levels.
Guiding Question. How prevalent are the three dimen-
sions of “hidden” information in source files of preprints?
To provide insights into this guiding question, we filter for
interesting content (Section 6.1.1), quantify frequent issues
(Section 6.1.2), and analyze differences across submission
categories, versions, and years (Section 6.1.3).

100
101
102
103
104
Count per submission [#]
0.001%
0.010%
0.100%
1%
10%
100%
1 - CDF [%]
Dangling files
Metadata files
Comments
Unique
Figure 3. Complementary cumulative distribution functions (1-CDFs) of
total and unique “hidden” information per arXiv submission across the three
dimensions: dangling files, metadata key-value pairs, and LATEX comments.
6.1.1. Filtering For “Interesting” Content. After process-
ing the entire dataset of arXiv sources, we obtain a massive
volume of “hidden” information for analysis across all
considered dimensions, including 12 M dangling files, 144 M
metadata key-value pairs, and 644 M comments. Fig. 3 shows
their distribution across submissions. However, a substantial
fraction of this massive volume of “hidden” information
repeats across (many) submissions (e.g., unused template
files or comments in templates) and thus likely does not
constitute potentially unintentionally-disclosed information.
“Interesting” Content. To instead focus only on po-
tential cases of unintentional information disclosure, we
define “interesting” content as any content that is (almost)
unique to an individual submission, following the intuition
that “hidden” information occurring only in one submission
likely was added by the authors of this submission (and
not inherited, e.g., from templates). More specifically, we
filter out any dangling file, metadata value, or comment that
we find in more than two submissions (to account for rare
duplicates by chance or reuse by the same authors).
In Fig. 3, we visualize complementary cumulative distri-
bution functions (1-CDFs), detailing the number of unique
and total information for the three dimensions.
File Level. Out of 50 M total files, we find 45 M (91 %)
to be unique (occurring at most twice) based on SHA256
fingerprints (44 M/88 % for strict uniqueness). This method-
ology filters out 181 k distinct files that we, on average, find
in 23.6 different submissions (median=3, max=57 k). LATEX
templates (.tex/.sty/.cls/.bst) account for 66 % of these files,
and 15 % correspond to images or PDFs.
Metadata Level. Metadata either stems from file-level
modification timestamps (90 % of submissions contain such
data, i.e., were uploaded as an archive preserving this
information) or from information embedded in images, PDFs,
XML, and other file types that can be extracted using
exiftool [69] (93 % of submissions). Out of the timestamps,
98 % are unique, indicating that they are not artifacts of
packing submissions for upload to arXiv (per submission,
94 % of files have unique timestamps). Interestingly, 84 % of
filtered timestamps coincide with filtered files, confirming a
common origin, such as from a ZIP file of a LATEX template.
For metadata extracted using exiftool, we count a total of
111 M key-value pairs, of which 38 % are unique. Still, non-
unique metadata values can carry relevant information, e.g.,
common software producer names or version numbers.
Content/Text Level. We identify 644 M independent
LATEX comments in total; the majority of comments (93 %)
are part of required files. Comments are present in 95 % of
all considered arXiv submissions. After filtering for unique
comments, we obtain 114 M “interesting” comments for
analysis that span across 75 % of the considered submissions.
Our analysis not only reveals a large amount of “hidden”
information across all three dimensions, but also shows that
the majority of this information is sufficiently unique to likely
originate from authors directly. Consequently, our analysis in
the following focuses on precisely this “interesting” data, as
it is substantially more likely to contain sensitive information
than repeatedly occurring data (e.g., template files, common
producer metadata values, or comments in template files).
6.1.2. Quantifying Frequent Issues. To gain a better
understanding of the frequency of specific aspects of “hidden”
information, we compare the prevalence and interplay of
its three dimensions. As we visualize in Fig. 4, most
arXiv submissions contain “interesting” comments (75 %).
In contrast, fewer submissions contain unique metadata
(56 %) or unique dangling files (25 %). When looking at
submissions that contain “hidden” information from more
than one dimension, we observe that comments and metadata
occur together most frequently (30 %). 18 % of submissions
even contain “hidden” information from all three dimensions;
most (88 %) contain “hidden” information in at least one of
the dimensions.
6.1.3. Differences in Years, Research Fields, and Ver-
sions. To better understand potential factors influencing the
prevalence of these discoveries, we analyze the prevalence
of “hidden” information for (i) changes over time, (ii) differ-
ences across disciplines, and (iii) observed variance between
different versions of the same submission hosted at arXiv.
Years. As we show in Fig. 4 (left side), the prevalence of
“hidden” information in arXiv source files slowly increases
over time across the dimensions. This observation particularly
holds for the prevalence of dangling files (starting in 2013),
and holds for all dimensions since 2017. Perhaps surprisingly,
events such as the release or recommendation of sanitization
tools or (negative) publicity surrounding “hidden” informa-
tion have no noticeable impact on the observed trends.
Research Fields. As a multi-disciplinary preprint reposi-
tory, arXiv is structured into 38 categories. To understand
whether the prevalence of “hidden” information shows
research domain-specific differences, we aggregate these
categories into nine research fields for comparison. As we
detail in Fig. 4 (right side), some disciplines, e.g., Math or
Physics, feature substantially fewer “interesting” dangling
files, potentially because their submissions overall consist
of fewer files. Given their high share of submissions (black
dots in Fig. 4), they have a substantial impact on the overall
results that we report. Thus, covering different research fields
when quantifying “hidden” information in arXiv source files
is important to gain a comprehensive picture.
In addition to this high-level comparison, we further
assess whether computer science researchers, in general, and
security researchers (A*-/A-/B-/C-ranked conferences), in

1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026
0
20
40
60
80
100
Share of source
submissions [%]
arXiv endorses
perl one-liner
Twitter bot account online
Google blog announces ALC
ALC endorsed
by arXiv
Elsa Lab
arXiv cleaner
Bubeck et al.
GPT-4 case
Submission
system 1.5
Submissions over time
CS
cs.CR
econ
eess
math
physics
q-bio
q-fin
stat
Other
A*
A
B
C
ArXiv research fields
CORE
security FoR
103
104
105
106
Submission count [#]
At least one issue
All three issues
Has dangling file
Has metadata
Has comment
Unique values
Submission count
Figure 4. Development of the prevalence of “hidden” information over time shows an upward trend (left) as well as across aggregated arXiv categories and
the CORE [83] field of research (FoR) 4604 “cybersecurity and privacy” (right), revealing minor differences across research fields and publication venues.
20
40
60
80
100
120
Paper version
0
100
200
300
400
Normalized count
(v1=100)
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
101
1 - CDF [%]
Dangling file
Metadata
Comment
1 - CDF
All
Unique
Figure 5. Subsequent versions rather add unique data over the first version.
Only in the long tail, few papers with many versions skew this trend.
particular, exhibit any differences in their behavior (Ap-
pendix C details how we match arXiv submissions to
published papers by title using dblp [84]). A two-sided
Mann-Whitney U test confirms significant differences be-
tween all dimensions shown in Fig. 4 when comparing CS
(with cs.CR, cryptography and security) against the rest,
as well as between cs.CR and the rest of computer science
(p < 0.0001 in all cases): There is more “hidden” information
in computer science papers compared to other disciplines,
and even more in security-related papers. Interestingly, the
same observation holds when comparing A* security papers
with A ones (p < 0.0001). Again, higher-ranked venues
feature a significantly larger share of “hidden” information.
Normalizing issues by the LATEX file size (in bytes) to account
for length differences does not change this observation. A
potential explanation could rather be that computer scientists
(and authors of A* papers) have more elaborate source files,
while not necessarily paying more attention to “hidden”
information. On a positive note, out of 1974 dblp-matched
security papers also submitted to arXiv, we discover 243
submissions without any dangling files or other irrelevant
content. When also considering the absence of metadata, we
identify 70 “perfectly clean” security papers.
Versions. To support the evolution of a preprint over time,
arXiv allows superseding a submission with a new version
(cf. Section 2). While tools for comparing the PDF content
of papers over versions exist [85], [86], the impact of new
(updated) versions on “hidden” information remains unknown
so far. As we illustrate in Fig. 5, many authors update their
arXiv-hosted papers over time, even repeatedly, or withdraw
them [35], thereby marking them as obsolete (their sources
remain publicly available). Intuitively, one reason to submit a
new version of a paper could be an attempt to fix or to remove
“hidden” information that was accidentally published. Indeed,
individual examples such as a submission initially containing
many valid OpenID tokens in dangling files that were later
removed with an updated version confirm this suspicion
(although this practice is an ineffective mitigation, as the
source files of old versions remain accessible). However, at
scale, we do not see any consistent indication that authors
in general reduce the amount of “hidden” information when
updating their preprints with a new version, when comparing
the prevalence of “hidden” information between versions in
Fig. 5 (in the long tail, the low number of papers with many,
≥20, versions prevents deriving well-founded conclusions).
Takeaway. All three dimensions of “hidden” information
are prevalent issues, collectively affecting 88 % of arXiv
source-code submissions across years, research fields, and
submission versions, especially when focusing on “interest-
ing”, i.e., seldomly occurring, content.
6.2. Individually Looking at “Hidden” Secrets
While our initial analysis already establishes the preva-
lence of “hidden” information in arXiv submissions, so far
we only know that the majority (88 %) of submissions contain
interesting, i.e., unique “hidden” content. We now take a
closer look at the individual pieces of “hidden” information.
Guiding Questions. Which individual cases of “hidden”
information can we discover? How sensitive are these cases?
To answer these questions, we examine the three dimen-
sions of “hidden” information (file, metadata, and content/-
text) individually. To this end, we focus on identifying poten-
tially sensitive information disclosure on a per-submission
basis, i.e., if we identify an issue in multiple versions of the
same paper, we only count and report it once.
Where possible, we follow the approach of Leon et
al. [87] to label findings as high (H), medium (M), or low
(L) impact based on the potential severity of them being
publicly available. However, this labeling does not imply
that all reported findings indeed have the labeled impact.
6.2.1. Category 1 : Bulk of Dangling Files. Overall, we
discover a total of 12.0 M dangling files. Digging into file and
MIME types, we observe the distribution shown in Fig. 6 with
a similar distribution across dangling and non-dangling files
for frequent file types and a long-tail of rare file types that are
predominantly dangling files, including Readme files (3.4 %

Others
jpeg
no subtype
pdf
plain
png
postscript
MIME subtype
application
image
other
text
MIME type
.bbl
.bib
.bst
.eps
.jpg
.pdf
.png
.ps
.sty
.tex
Others
File ending
Dangling
Not
dangling
Dangling status
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Dangling ratio
Figure 6. arXiv source files contain a broad range of file types. Some types,
e.g., images, are more frequently dangling files than others, e.g., TEX files.
of submissions, L), Python code (0.21 %, L), shell scripts
(0.21 %, L) and other executable files (0.041 %, L). We also
find research-related data in CSV (0.20 %, M) and SQLite
form (0.002 %, M). 0.007 % of submissions (intentionally)
contain “dangling” files within the anc/ directory [88] (cf.
Section 7.3), which we thus do not interpret as dangling.
In general, we cannot reliably assess whether dangling
files have been intentionally submitted or not. While 173 k
dangling files carry a path such as supplementary
or additional_data, likely indicating intentional sub-
mission, 256 k files correspond to directories that contain
backup, old, or similar, instead indicating unintentional
submission. Aggravatingly, 40 submissions contain hidden
.nfs files that are created by NFS filesystems immediately
after removal (M), and 74 contain complete Git repositories,
including editing histories that we consider unintentionally
submitted (M). Furthermore, we discover configuration files
that can carry sensitive information such as API keys or
database connection strings in 2774 submissions (H, we
detail those findings in Section 6.2.3).