ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband
Interface
Tobias Kr¨oll1, Stephan Kleber2, Frank Kargl2, Matthias Hollick1, and Jiska
Classen1
1 TU Darmstadt, Secure Mobile Networking Lab, Germany
tkroell,mhollick,jclassen@seemoo.de
2 Ulm University, Institute of Distributed Systems, Germany
{stephan.kleber,frank.kargl}@uni-ulm.de
Abstract. Wireless chips and interfaces expose a substantial remote
attack surface. As of today, most cellular baseband security research is
performed on the Android ecosystem, leaving a huge gap on Apple de-
vices. With iOS jailbreaks, last-generation wireless chips become fairly
accessible for performance and security research. Yet, iPhones were never
intended to be used as a research platform, and chips and interfaces
are undocumented. One protocol to interface with such chips is Ap-
ple Remote Invocation (ARI), which interacts with the central phone
component CommCenter and multiple user-space daemons, thereby pos-
ing a Remote Code Execution (RCE) attack surface. We are the first
to reverse-engineer and fuzz-test the ARI interface on iOS. Our Ghidra
scripts automatically generate a Wireshark dissector, called ARIstoteles,
by parsing closed-source iOS libraries for this undocumented protocol.
Moreover, we compare the quality of the dissector to fully-automated ap-
proaches based on static trace analysis. Finally, we fuzz the ARI interface
based on our reverse-engineering results. The fuzzing results indicate that
ARI does not only lack public security research but also has not been
well-tested by Apple. By releasing ARIstoteles open-source, we also aim
to facilitate similar research in the future.
Keywords: Apple Remote Invocation · Baseband · iPhone · Fuzzing
1
Introduction
Any component on a mobile system that is reachable over the air poses a secu-
rity risk. On smartphones, the largest attack surface is functionality related to
the cellular baseband—they pose the longest wireless range and most complex
codebase. However, many wireless components are closed-source and undocu-
mented, such as wireless firmware and vendor-specific system extensions on all
This is the accepted manuscript of a chapter published in Springer. The final au-
thenticated version is available online at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10
.1007/978-3-030-88418-5_7
arXiv:2604.23457v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

2
Kr¨oll et al.
mobile platforms or wireless daemons on iOS. Thus, these complex components
are often untested by public security research.
We focus on iOS since it experienced significantly less public testing than
Android. Recent iPhones come with basebands from either Qualcomm or In-
tel. Intel basebands are predominant on the European market and are at least
shipped in the iPhone 7, 8, Xs, 11, and SE2 models. The same chip as in the
iPhone 11 and SE2 is used by the iPad Air 2020, but telephony functionality
is restricted. Moreover, the Apple Watch 6 GPS+Cellular has a feature-reduced
Intel baseband variant. The management protocol for Qualcomm chips is called
Qualcomm MSM Interface (QMI), which open-source libraries support [12]. On
Android devices, Intel chips use AT commands as control interface [6]. Likely
for better interoperability and a feature set closer to QMI, Apple introduced Ap-
ple Remote Invocation (ARI). Security of the ARI interface is unstudied, even
though it resides in the heart of the iOS baseband ecosystem.
Understanding ARI enables baseband research on Apple devices. Via de-
bug profiles [3], it supports passive baseband analysis on non-jailbroken devices.
Moreover, on jailbroken devices, this knowledge can be used to control the base-
band chip. Basic protocol structure information is already sufficient to inject
mutated ARI payloads for fuzzing purposes. However, more fine-grained control
requires understanding all protocol internals in detail. To establish the under-
standing, we reverse-engineered iOS ARI parsing libraries. We instrumented
them with our Ghidra scripts to automatically extract type information to gen-
erate a Lua-based Wireshark dissector [19,28], which we name ARIstoteles. More
precisely, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
– We are the first to publicly reverse-engineer and document the ARI
protocol, resulting in the Wireshark dissector ARIstoteles.
– Our Ghidra scripts generate ARIstoteles, which automatically detect new
protocol fields added in future iOS updates.
– We compare the Ghidra-based dissector generation approach to fully au-
tomated dissector generation based on static analysis of protocol
traces.
– By fuzzing the ARI interface in user space with f
r
ida [20], we encounter
various parsing errors and crashes in iOS binaries.
Overall, we identify 42 unique crashes in CommCenter and ARI-related pars-
ing libraries. Due to the central role of CommCenter within iOS—the telephony
daemon in the iPhone—these crashes caused by the fuzzer also affect 12 daemons
communicating with CommCenter via Cross-Process Communication (XPC). We
emphasize that we disclosed all fuzzing results to Apple, who started patching
in iOS 14.2 and added further patches in iOS 14.6. ARIstoteles and crashing
example payloads are available online.3
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 explains the baseband security
model and security research in this field. Before diving into further details, Sec-
tion 3 describes the basic ARI packet structure, which helps understanding why
3 https://github.com/seemoo-lab/aristoteles

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
3
static traffic-based approaches are not optimal to dissect ARI automatically in
Section 4. Thus, we create Ghidra scripts in Section 5, which extract protocol
information from shared libraries. These scripts work across 10 different iOS
versions. We use this protocol knowledge to fuzz CommCenter via ARI in Sec-
tion 6 and show that the ARIstoteles dissector can be used to understand these
crashes. We conclude our results and outline the security impact in Section 7.
2
Background and Related Work
The following section provides background information on the iOS baseband
architecture as well as previous security-related research in this area.
2.1
Baseband Security Architecture
When a wireless packet from a base station reaches a modern smartphone, it
usually passes several data processing layers. First, the baseband chip performs
initial processing. Then, it passes management information and data to the mo-
bile operating system kernel running on the main processor. Usually, the kernel
component is as minimalistic as possible since it runs with high privileges. Hence,
most protocol parsing is outsourced to sandboxed daemons running in user space.
A concrete example of this separation on modern iOS devices is shown in
Figure 1. The baseband chip processes data, which in turn passes information
to CommCenter. Due to intermediate data processing, some contents are not di-
rectly passed on to iOS. This abstraction layer might prevent some over-the-air
attacks but can also introduce further mistakes. For example, the baseband chip
scans for nearby cells and measures their signal strength, and then further as-
sembles this information into a list sent to CommCenter. Parsing issues could be
on-chip, when directly processing cell information, but also within CommCenter,
when parsing the list reported by the chip. If abstraction by the chip prevents
exploitation, an on-chip RCE is required to escalate into iOS. Typically, wireless
Shared libraries loaded by CommCenter depending on the chip.
CommCenter
wireless
locationd
root
Other Daemons
mobile
XPC
XPC
Intel
...
libARI.dylib
libARIServer.dylib
Qualcomm
...
libABMCommandDriversEUR.dylib
libATCommandStudioDynamic.dylib
Kernel Drivers
User Space
Kernel Space
ARI
QMI
ARIHostRt::InboundMsgCB
R
R
QMuxState:handleReadData
Fig. 1: Simplified baseband packet parsing architecture on iOS 12–14.

4
Kr¨oll et al.
chips are optimized towards performance rather than security. Thus, baseband
chips miss common mitigation mechanisms and are a common exploitation tar-
get [5,9,14,22]. In the following, we assume that the attacker either already has
code execution on the baseband chip (e.g., they can create an arbitrary list of
cells with invalid entries and report it to CommCenter) or that data injected
by an over-the-air attacker is not abstracted by the baseband chip (e.g., the
cell identifiers are not further processed by the chip and directly forwarded to
CommCenter). Depending on the chip type, Intel or Qualcomm, ARI or QMI is
the baseband management interface.
While this paper does not cover Android in detail, the overall architecture
is very similar. However, Android has a more diverse device landscape and en-
ables vendors to add new wireless chips. To this end, Android defines a Radio
Interface Layer (RIL) [2]. Depending on the chip, a vendor-specific library parses
custom chip commands and translates them to RIL calls. Data between these
components is passed as Binder parcels. Binder abstracts communication be-
tween kernel and user space. Thus, it has been a popular research target for
automated fuzzing in the past [13,26].
In contrast to Android, baseband components on iOS were not extensively
researched. In 2009, Mulliner and Miller approached iOS fuzzing over the air by
injecting SMS [18]. Besides Denial of Service (DoS), they were able to gain code
execution via an SMS parsing issue in CommCenter [17]. This bug was found on
one of the very first iOS releases—the first iPhone was released in 2007—and iOS
2 already had a CommCenter daemon but running as root without sandboxing.
Inspired by this bug, Silvanovich revisited SMS parsing on the significantly more
hardened iOS 11 but could not find any issues [25]. SMS fuzzing is related to
ARI fuzzing, since ARI also carries SMS payloads. Apart from SMS parsing,
we are not aware of any public security research revolving around CommCenter,
which is surprising given that it poses a zero-click RCE attack surface.
2.2
Baseband Interface Analysis Options on iOS
Apple provides a baseband debug profile on the developer website [3]. After
installation on any iPhone, it is possible to observe the baseband–CommCenter
interface. Not all capabilities of debug profiles are documented. The documen-
tation for the baseband debug profile only states the location of baseband chip
crash logs, which are stored in the undocumented Intel System Trace Proto-
col (ISTP) format. Surprisingly, after installing a baseband debug profile on an
iPhone—even if not jailbroken—all QMI respectively ARI packets are printed
to the system log as hexadecimal bytes. Packets can be interpreted on the fly by
parsing the log during runtime.
On jailbroken devices, it is furthermore possible to inject custom QMI and
ARI payloads. Silvanovich instrumented an undocumented XPC interface for
internal SMS testing [25], which injects SMS without passing the QMI and ARI
parsing layer. Instead of XPC interfaces, we use f
r
ida to directly hook into the
CommCenter libraries responsible for parsing baseband messages [20]. Similar
to a debugger, f
r
ida can attach to a running process. It features support for

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
5
modifying a process, injecting payloads, and tracing program execution. Thus,
by hooking into a process with f
r
ida, we are not restricted to pre-defined XPC
interfaces and can even rewrite parts of the program code.
2.3
iOS Shared Libraries
Usually, iOS shared libraries are stored within one large dyld_shared_cache
binary file. After attaching an iPhone to Xcode on macOS and setting it up
for development, separated shared library files are extracted to the folder ~/
Library/Developer/Xcode/iOSDeviceSupport/. In contrast to most other iOS
binaries, shared libraries are meant to be loaded and called by external processes.
Thus, they export many function signatures, making them easily accessible with
tools like Ghidra despite being closed-source. The shared libraries handling ARI
are called libARIServer.dylib and libARI.dylib.
libARIServer.dylib is the last instance aware of protocol internals before
passing packets to kernel drivers. Thus, it is the perfect library for injecting
arbitrary payloads. When sending information to the baseband, the function
AriHostRt::SendRaw is called, and the opposite direction uses the function
AriHostRt::InboundMsgCB. We will use these library functions for fuzzing in
Section 6. However, this library only performs a few final checks, such as check-
ing sequence numbers, likely to prevent out-of-order packets caused by multi-
threading.
libARI.dylib is closer to CommCenter and performs most of the parsing and
message abstraction. It contains human-readable names of all message groups as
well as definitions of most Type Length Value (TLV) types. Hence, it is a great
resource to automatically generate a Wireshark dissector, as shown in Section 5.
3
Apple Remote Invocation Protocol
ARI is an Apple-internal protocol without any public documentation. While we
are the first to analyze ARI, it would be hard to follow our reverse engineering
process and problems encountered using different approaches without a basic
understanding of the protocol structure. Technical details about how most of
the information was obtained will follow in Section 5.
0
32
37
40
47 48
Magic Bytes
Group
Sequence
Number
G
0xdec07eab
00111
000
0000000
0
0
7
8
16
18
21
24
32
48
Length
S
N
Length
T
S
N
Type
001000
0
00000000
10
000
000
01000101
0000001000001010
Fig. 2: ARI header format, 12 B split into according bits with example values.

6
Kr¨oll et al.
0
7
8
11
16
22
24
32
48
Type
Vers
Type
Length
Length
Value
0000010
0
001
00000
000010
00
00000000
0000000000000000
Fig. 3: ARI TLV format with example payloads.
As a management protocol, ARI only carries commands and information of
a more general nature without large amounts of data. For example, it signals
incoming phone calls—but the audio is sent over a different interface. Moreover,
network traffic is not handled by ARI. Nonetheless, ARI carries lightweight in-
formation besides connection management, including SMS, location, and time.
Each ARI packet has a fixed-length header with a group and type identifier.
The group defines the overall purpose, e.g., SMS processing, making calls, SIM
access, diagnostics, and more. Group types define further actions, such as ac-
knowledging an SMS, a request to send an SMS, or the delivery status of an
SMS. Furthermore, the header defines the remaining packet length, which is
filled with multiple Type Length Value (TLV) structures. TLVs can be manda-
tory or optional. The minimum packet length is 12 B for packets that only have
a header and no TLV payload.
Since ARI is for Apple-internal use only, the protocol structure has grown
historically. This shows in the header format in Figure 2. For example, the se-
quence number was probably added to unused bits within three non-consecutive
bytes. This makes the header extremely hard to understand.
TLVs following the header are shown in Figure 3. In addition to a type,
length, and value, they also have a version number. This packet structure still
does not reflect protocol semantics. However, it outlines that ARI is rather com-
plex and historically grown, making further security research challenging.
4
Fully-Automated Protocol Dissection
Manually analyzing large packet traces and spotting patterns is a tedious task.
Despite being experienced with protocol reverse engineering, we failed to identify
most fields in the header manually in the beginning when we did not have the
information from Section 3. Thus, as a first step, we use a heuristics-based seg-
mentation only relying on traffic traces, which has been very successful on various
other protocols, including the proprietary Apple Wireless Direct Link (AWDL)
protocol [27]. In this process, which is based on nemesys and nemetyl [11,10],
we identify segment boundaries that are the basis to classify packet types.
We run both algorithms on a trace with 1000 packets. The trace is collected
from an iPhone when making a phone call and receiving SMS. The overall trace
contains 2497 packets, and we reduce it by subsampling the recorded trace to
1000 messages to make the classification computationally feasible. For retaining
most of the variance across the reduced amount of messages, we select the most
dissimilar packets. We measure the dissimilarity by the number of uncommon
byte sequences per message. Subsampling reduces the groups from 22 to 20. The

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
7
by far most frequent group is net_cell (labels obtained during later analysis)
with 312 occurrences. Almost 95 % of all messages are of 9 different groups.
Figure 4 shows the manually reverse-engineered header format on top and
the result of the nemesys segmentation on the bottom. With one exception in
the magic bytes, all segment boundaries are correct. However, the segmentation
algorithm only tries to find boundaries on a byte level and not on a bit level.
Moreover, the segmentation algorithm is not aware of non-continuous segments.
It is important to note that these two properties, bit-level and non-continuous
segments, are scarce for most protocols, with a few exceptions like flag fields
that would not lead to such a high fragmentation. While bit-level segmentation
would be easy to integrate into the existing segmentation algorithm, identifying
split segments and grouping them into one seems hard to achieve. Adding more
freedom to segmentation also increases the likelihood of detecting additional false
segment boundaries in general. Especially the bit-fragmented fields spread over
multiple offsets are particular to ARI and very uncommon for other protocols.
These disjoint short chunks of bits make it almost impossible to apply statistical
methods in static traffic analysis.
Next, we use nemetyl to identify the message type automatically. In contrast
to a traditional packet parser, nemetyl does not rely on detecting the group and
type field in the header. Thus, even if the header segmentation with nemesys
fails, correctly segmenting parts of the remaining packet and classifying them by
the overall message similarity can be successful. As shown in Figure 5, nemetyl
0
32
37
40
47 48
Magic Bytes
Group
Sequence
Number
G
Segment 1
Segment 2
Segment 3 ...
0
7
8
16
18
21
24
32
48
Length
S
N
Length
T
S
N
Type
... Segment 3
Segment 4
Segment 5
Fig. 4: Heuristic-based analysis results for the ARI header.
Noise
0
10s0
10s1
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2
20
21
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
3s0
3s1
3s2
4
5
6
8
9
{1, 25, 7}
Clusters + Groups
net_rat
call_ps
call_ps
sim_access
ice_awds
sim_pb
sys_res
net_plmn
net_plmn
net_rat
net_rat
call_ps
security
net_rat
sim_sec
call_ps
ims_me
sim_sec
ims_me
sim_tk
ims_me
ice_audio
sms
net_rat
net_rat
net_rat
-
sim_access
net_rat
net_rat
sim_access
-
Fig. 5: Message type classification results showing multiple clusters.

8
Kr¨oll et al.
indeed locates multiple clusters in the message trace. A unique color indicates a
cluster. To plot the dissimilarities of the messages, their relative positions to each
other are projected into a two-dimensional plane using Multi-dimensional Scaling
(MDS) [24]. The absolute positions in the plot are insignificant, therefore we omit
any axis labels. nemetyl identifies 32 clusters. Only two of these clusters contain
messages of multiple groups, and the remaining 30 clusters belong to exactly
one group, meaning that the group classification is highly accurate. Some of
the correctly identified group clusters contain multiple message types. Six group
clusters contain two message types, and one group contains four message types.
Such mistakes can be explained with similar packets belonging to different groups
or types, for example, an SMS in send versus receive direction.
We conclude that static traffic analysis shows a high potential to identify
message types correctly. Since ARI is a protocol with uncommon properties, the
analysis would need further optimizations and very specific adaptions to work
properly. Some of the required changes are likely to only apply for ARI. Thus,
instead of overfitting the heuristics, we continue with manual reverse-engineering
and automate these findings with Ghidra scripts. As future work, we plan to
improve the static traffic analysis method with the insights gained in this use
case to ease its application for other specialized unknown protocols.
5
Automated Reverse-Engineering
Packet structure information is sufficient for basic security research, such as
generation-based fuzzing. However, to understand what exactly ARI does and
utilize the baseband, additional information is required. iOS needs some of this
information since it parses ARI packets coming from the baseband and creates
commands sent to the baseband. Depending on the underlying chip, Qualcomm
or Intel, CommCenter loads shared libraries for parsing QMI or ARI. In the fol-
lowing, we automatically analyze ARI parsing in the libARI.dylib library to
create a Lua-based dissector. First, we manually locate and reverse-engineer the
central data structures and functions, which we then parse automatically. The
automated analysis even enables us to track protocol changes in iOS updates.
While the initial parser generation needs manual work, it could be applied for
other proprietary protocols parsed by shared libraries. In addition to shared
libraries, some macOS binaries contain more symbols than iOS binaries. Some-
times, Apple accidentally releases a kernel without stripping symbols like in an
early iOS 14 Beta release.
5.1
Group and TLV Definitions
Message parsing starts at the function AriMsg::AriMsg. After checking that the
message starts with the magic bytes 0xdec07eab and is at least 12 B long, it
passes the message to Ari::MsgDefById. This function assigns group informa-
tion via a lookup in the array called ARIMSGDEF_GROUPS. This array contains 63

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
9
pointers to group definitions on iOS 14.5. Each group definition contains an ar-
ray of fixed-length message type objects. Likely, they were structures and arrays
before compilation and only contained data, no code.
Figure 6 shows one of these message type objects in the net_cell group. Each
object contains the group number, which is the same as the array index. This
is followed by a unique message type identifier. Moreover, each group definition
contains three pointers: a list of mandatory TLVs, a full list including optional
TLVs, and a human-readable type name.
The first entry in the list of TLVs is shown in Figure 7. Each TLV definition
starts with an incrementing index number and a type identifier. Then, the actual
definition follows, consisting of a pointer to the encoding and the name.
We extract both structures, shown in Figure 6 and 7, with a Ghidra script.
This way, we can access all information with a decompiler despite not hav-
ing any source code. The script starts at the symbol ARIMSGDEF_GROUPS in
libARI.dylib, which is exported and, thus, easy to locate. Then, the script
follows the pointers to the group and TLV definitions. Since the actual defini-
tion structure is removed during the compilation process, we apply the reverse-
engineered structural information from Figure 6 and 7. The script finishes infor-
mation extraction when a null entry terminates a list. Finally, all information
is written into a Lua table, which is included by the Wireshark dissector.
5.2
Type Definitions
As of iOS 14.5, the shared ARI library defines 290 asString methods. The
method definitions differ by the parameter type, which corresponds to an encod-
ing. An encoding specifies a human-readable format of a type. For example, a
phone call can be disconnected due to 226 reasons, represented by an integer, and
the corresponding asString method transforms this number to a more descrip-
tive reason. The asString methods are code and, thus, do not follow the same
simple memory structure as the group and TLV definitions. Moreover, likely
due to compiler optimizations, each asString method looks slightly different.
During a manual comparison, we identify three variants:
1. A lookup table, where the input is used as index in a list of strings.
2. An if-not construct, where strings are set to a default value and changed if
the default does not apply in a fall-through manner.
3. A switch-case construct containing early returns, if statements, and jumps.
0
4
8
16
24
32
48
Group Type
Padding
Mandatory
TLVs
Available
TLVs
Unknown
Name
0x9
0x101
0x0
0x1C6B4D468
0x1D9507480
0x0003...00
0x1C6B847E0
msg101 mtlvs msg101 tlvs
IBINetSet...
Fig. 6: First message object in ARIMSGDEF GROUP09 net cell, defining the mes-
sage structure of IBINetSetRadioSignalReportingConfiguration.

10
Kr¨oll et al.
0
4
8
16
24
Index
Type
Padding
Encoding
Name
0x1
0x101
0x0
0x1DE283508
0x1C6B666E5
ARI IBIUInt32 1 CODEC
nInstance t1
Fig. 7: First TLV object in msg101 tlvs, defining the type structure of
nInstance t1.
The first two variants account for 240 of 290 asString methods and can
be automatically extracted with Ghidra. Due to the inconsistent structure of
the third variant, we have to extract these definitions manually. It would also
be possible to emulate the asString methods. However, their input range is
undefined, and without analyzing their code, emulation might miss some inputs.
1
char* asString( IBIImsMEAudioEVSBandWidthType t) {
// at
address 0x1e0d2ab38
2
if (t - 1 < 8) {
3
return
*( char
**)(( long)&PTR s IBI IMS ME AUDIO BAND NB 1e0d2ab38 + (long)(int)(t
- 1) * 8);
4
}
5
return "???";
6
}
Listing 1.1: asString method with a look-up table (variant 1).
We show how to extract the first variant, but all scripts and the Wireshark
dissector are available online. Each lookup table has a wrapper function like the
one shown in Listing 1.1. It optionally adds an offset to the type prior to the
lookup in the string list. If the value is undefined, the string ??? is returned.
Mapping strings requires locating the lookup table as well as the range of input
values. To this end, we need to interpret Ghidra P-Code instructions, which are
the internal architecture-independent code representation within Ghidra. On a
more detailed level, the extraction script works by iterating over all P-Code
operands of the asString function.
5.3
Integrating Existing Dissectors
ARI embeds further formats that are well-known, such as SMS. After adding
these dissectors manually, the Wireshark output becomes even more readable.
Figure 8 shows how the resulting dissector looks after adding TLV and type
definitions as well as SMS parsing.
5.4
iOS Version Change Tracking
Using the resulting Ghidra scripts enables tracking changes in the ARI proto-
col over multiple iOS versions. The results in Table 1 show that automated

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
11
Fig. 8: ARIstoteles dissecting an SMS.
Wireshark dissector generation does not only save manual reverse-engineering
overhead during initial dissector generation but with every iOS update. This
especially applies to TLV types. The similar numbers indicate that the scripts
run flawless, independent of slight differences introduced by the different com-
pilation processes. Tracking changes within ARI allows determining if and when
new features were added to the protocol and test these in specific. Interestingly,
the last ARI update was applied in iOS 13.5, released in parallel to the iPhone
SE 2020.
Table 1: Extracted data structures for different iOS versions.
iOS Version
Types asString (total) asString (extracted)
12.5.1 (16H22)
783
290
249
13.3 (17C54)
874
290
249
13.5 (17F75)
879
290
249
6 versions skipped
—
—
—
14.5 (18E199a)
879
290
249

12
Kr¨oll et al.
6
Fuzzing
Based on the protocol knowledge, we can now inject messages into CommCenter.
We leverage this for smart fuzzing, compare ARI results to QMI, and outline
how to build high-performance iOS fuzzers. Finally, we analyze these crashes.
6.1
Initial Fuzzing Considerations
There are only a few options for fuzzing closed-source iOS daemons. Corel-
lium, the most advanced commercial iOS emulation, does not support cellular
daemons and hardware as of May 2021 [4]. Open-source emulators can only
boot parts of the kernel but not the entire system [1]. Thus, we need to fuzz
CommCenter on a physical iPhone. Non-emulated fuzzing has various draw-
backs [16], such as non-scalability and no possibility to reset the system state.
Nonetheless, running on physical hardware can find more realistic bugs. Given
these circumstances, we present the considerations that led to our setup for
fuzzing ARI messages in the following.
In-process Fuzzing on a Physical Device Our fuzzer is based on f
r
ida, which in-
jects a new thread into the target process. This means that a partial or complete
fuzzer is running within the CommCenter process. Listing 1.2 shows a minimal
code example that injects a single message using the JavaScript API. The pay-
load is injected into the target function AriHostRt::InboundMsgCB within the
libARIServer.dylib shared library. The example only calls the target function
once. For fuzzing, payloads would need to be generated and the function had to
be called repeatedly. Moreover, we attach a so-called interceptor to the target
function, which can read and modify input parameters before execution. This
is necessary to keep track and adjust the sequence numbers since the physical
baseband continues sending messages during the fuzzing process, resulting in
out-of-order sequence numbers. Additionally, the f
r
ida stalker can trace exe-
cuted functions or code blocks, enabling coverage collection [21]. Execution is
traced by dynamic binary rewriting during runtime and executing copies of the
original code that have additional tracing instructions.
1
//
define
hook
for ARI
messages
chip (BB) -> iOS (AP)
2
var
InboundMsgCb_addr = Module. getExportByName (’libARIServer .dylib ’, ’
_ZN9AriHostRt12InboundMsgCBEPhm ’);
3
var
InboundMsgCb = new
NativeFunction (InboundMsgCb_addr , "int64", ["pointer",
"int64"]);
4
5
Interceptor.attach(InboundMsgCb_addr , {
//
optional
hook
customization
6
onEnter: function(args) {
7
// fix ARI
sequence
number , collect
basic
block
coverage , etc.
8
}});
9
10
InboundMsgCb (payload , length);
// call
the
target
once
Listing 1.2: Injecting an ARI packet within the CommCenter process with f
r
ida.

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
13
Payload Injection Payloads can either be generated (1) by an external device
and sent to the target or (2) within the f
r
ida thread. The first option enables
fast development and reusing existing fuzzing libraries without adapting them
to f
r
ida. If the target process CommCenter crashes, the external device is still
aware of the last packet sent prior to the crash. Furthermore, the external device
might have larger storage for packet and crash logs. However, the second option is
significantly faster. We explore and compare both strategies in the next section.
Payload Mutation Creating new payloads requires a mutation strategy, which
can be (1) coverage-based, (2) generation-based, or a combination of both. Even
without much knowledge about a protocol, the f
r
ida stalker can collect basic
block coverage and use this as a metric to improve the quality of injected packets.
Whenever a packet reaches a new basic block, it is added to the corpus. However,
collecting coverage with f
r
ida slows down the fuzzer. Another issue that arises
is inconsistent coverage. Most binary parsers that process files would always
produce the same coverage for the same input, and processing the current file
does not depend on the previous file. Protocols are very different and highly
state-dependent. For example, if a multi-part SMS is injected, the last message
part would increase the coverage, but injecting this message part again would
not increase the coverage. Thus, even injecting the same packet twice in a row
can lead to different coverages. Furthermore, processes have an inconsistent state
that is not solely controlled by packets injected by the fuzzer but configurations,
external daemons, or user interaction like enabling a mobile hotspot and dialing
a number, again leading to inconsistent coverage. The second option, which is
generating new messages based on protocol knowledge, is significantly faster
and does not lead to any issues with inconsistent coverage. We also compare
coverage-based to generation-based approaches.
6.2
Building and Optimizing Fuzzers
We compare five fuzzers with multiple injection and mutation strategies. These
variants lead to significantly different speeds, as we verified by fuzzing a com-
parable SMS payload with the performance results presented in Table 2. These
fuzzers do not only differ in speed but also type of crashes they are able to find.
Table 2: Fuzzing speed depending on the f
r
ida setup on an iPhone 7 with an
iOS 14.3 Beta and f
r
ida 14.1.2.
Speed Test Scenario
Fuzz Cases per Second
(5a) Local JavaScript SMS bit flipper
17 000
(5b) Local JavaScript SMS bit flipper with additional array copy
11 000
(4)
Local JavaScript SMS bit flipper collecting basic block coverage
250
(2)
External Python SMS injection
400
(3b) External Python SMS injection collecting basic block coverage
100
(3a) External ToothPicker variant with radamsa mutator and coverage
20

14
Kr¨oll et al.
The prior reverse-engineering of the protocol internals enables us to fix certain
aspects of the message, such as the sequence number. Moreover, we leave the
magic bytes in the header intact, and have options to only mutate the TLVs.
(1) Replacing Existing Messages This approach randomly changes a few bytes
after a random amount of messages. Ideally, the target iPhone has a SIM card
installed and is actively used to make phone calls, send messages, browse the
Internet, and so on. The total amount of messages highly depends on user in-
teraction, thus, we do not list it in Table 2, but it is significantly slower than all
other variants. When setting a good ratio of mutated versus original messages,
the iPhone works almost normally, and the fuzzer can reach states rather deep
within the protocol. Using this method, we found various crashes that cannot
be reproduced by replaying a message trace. For example, one null pointer issue
in the audio controller can only be triggered when the user previously initi-
ated a phone call—which requires user interaction and cannot be reproduced by
injecting ARI messages alone.
(2) External Message Generation In this approach, we collect a large message
corpus from typical baseband interaction. Then, we replay this corpus, either
ordered or unordered, and mutate a subset of the messages based on the protocol
structure. All messages are logged on the external device since some crashes only
occur on a packet sequence. This fuzzer reaches around 400 fuzz cases per second
(fcps).
(3) External Coverage-based radamsa Mutation One of our previous projects,
ToothPicker, fuzzes the Bluetooth daemon on iOS [8]. We adapt it to fuzz
CommCenter and observe a slightly slower speed than for the Bluetooth dae-
mon, around 20 fcps (3a). Note that when injecting payloads without the smart
radamsa mutation strategy, this could be improved up to 100 fcps (3b). Even
when initializing the radamsa mutator with different payloads, it tends to find
the same crashes over and over again. Usually, mutators are trying to fuzz crashes
again to determine the underlying issue further. However, in the case of an in-
process fuzzer based on f
r
ida, crashing CommCenter also leads to a crash of
the fuzzer. A CommCenter restart takes around 20–30 s. After a crash, we remove
the payload that lead to the crash from the corpus and reinitialize the fuzzer
by collecting coverage. On a large corpus, this can take several minutes, further
reducing the fuzzer’s speed.
(4) Local Coverage-based AFL++ Mutation Another option is to mutate the
payloads with AFL++ on the target device. This is meanwhile supported by
fpicker [7], and we were allowed to use an early pre-release version. Running
locally leads to a significant speedup of around 250 fcps, now primarily limited
by the f
r
ida stalker collecting coverage. This fuzzer is 10 × faster than Tooth-
Picker while supporting a similar feature set.

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
15
(5) Local High-speed Mutation We test the upper limit of achievable fuzzing
speed by randomly flipping bits within a provided message. This is not a powerful
mutator but shows that the fuzzing speed could be increased up to 17 000 fcps
(5a). Already very small changes, such as copying the payload array slightly
more inefficient (5b), lead to a speed reduction, as shown in Table 2.
Overall, we found the rather naive second approach the best to uncover new
crashes. Mutating payloads based on a large corpus and keeping structural pro-
tocol information intact reaches both a comparably fast fuzzing speed and high
bug density. Approaches collecting coverage were rather slow and suffered from
inconsistent coverage information, thereby not compensating massive slowdown
introduced by coverage collection.
CommCenter
42/14/4
9/3/0
Intel
Qualcomm
locationd
5/1/0
3/2/0
sharingd
1/0/0
abm-helper
1/1/0
awdd
1/0/0
imagent
1/0/0
misd
4/0/1
2/0/1
gpsd
1/0/0
suggestd
1/0/0
mediaserverd
2/0/0
WirelessRadioMangerd
1/1/1
abmlite
1/0/0
photoanalysisd
2/0/0
Individual crashes found: Total / Replayable / Fixed in iOS 14.3. Colors indicate ARI vs. QMI fuzzing.
Fig. 9: Fuzzing results, also affecting various daemons due to XPC.
6.3
Crash Evaluation
Every time a process crashes, iOS creates a crash log containing the exception
type, the name of the crashed thread within the process, as well as a backtrace of
each thread. Thus, we can identify unique crashes even without coverage-based
fuzzing. Figure 9 shows all crashes found by fuzzing QMI and ARI, including
processes that communicate with CommCenter using XPC. Even though QMI
has fewer bugs, components residing on top of the QMI protocol parser and in
external daemons crash as well, sometimes similar as during ARI fuzzing.
Due to state issues, not all crashes are replayable by injecting the same
messages as during fuzzing. For example, we find a crash in the Mobile Internet
Sharing Daemon misd, caused by invalid memory access to an address that looks
like a configuration string. This bug frequently occurs on Qualcomm and Intel
iPhones, meaning that it is chip-independent. However, it cannot be reproduced
by replaying packets. Apple rated the misd parsing issue as security-critical but
did not assign a Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) number since
they discovered it in parallel to our research. This bug was present in iOS 13.7
and fixed in iOS 14.2.

16
Kr¨oll et al.
Fig. 10: Crash within reported network cells during a scan.
Even when a bug is replayable, it is often hard to understand its root cause.
In contrast to the shared library we were parsing in Section 5, CommCenter
itself does not contain exported symbols. Thus, we only know the crash location
in a binary without function or variable names. Reading code in the binary
is further complicated by inaccuracies in the decompilation process, resulting
in wrong pseudo-code output. Understanding payloads significantly speeds up
manual crash analysis.
We illustrate this with a crash that occurs in the CellMonitor thread. It
accesses an invalid offset in the function processGsmCellInfo. Converting the
crashing packet into a Wireshark dump and opening it reveals which part of the
payload causes the crash, as shown in Figure 10, detailing the IBIGsmCellInfoT
contents. However, Apple did not assign a CVE number without a full proof of
concept showing if this bug is actually exploitable beyond denial of service.
While not assigning high priority to most bugs found by our fuzzer, Apple
did indeed fix all replayable crashes as of iOS 14.6. We assume that they were
running our fuzzer, which we provided to them, and most likely with further
internal analysis tools.
7
Conclusion
Proprietary and undocumented interfaces pose a huge security risk if not tested
thoroughly by manufacturers. Our fuzzing results let us assume that Apple did
not perform any fuzz testing on ARI. Given that this interface is reachable via
wireless components, this is surprising. We hope that Apple will improve wireless
interface security in future releases and run—among other security testing—
internal fuzzing campaigns.

ARIstoteles – Dissecting Apple’s Baseband Interface
17
The Wireshark dissector we provide will be a helpful research tool also after
ARI parsing issues got fixed within iOS. It enables debugging baseband interac-
tions on the fly and provides insights on network operation, SIM interaction, and
more. We hope that the open-source release of ARIstoteles will support wireless
security research in general. It is the first step towards a low-level cellular exper-
imentation framework comparable to projects that already exist for Bluetooth
and Wi-Fi [15,23]. Additionally, the Ghidra scripts will enable researchers to
build similar dissectors based on shared library information or leaked symbols.

18
Kr¨oll et al.
Availability
The ARIstoteles source code as well as the Ghidra extraction scripts are avail-
able on https://github.com/seemoo-lab/aristoteles. This repository also
contains the f
r
ida scripts that can record ARI packets during runtime and in-
ject packets, including replayable crashing packets and packet sequences found
with the fuzzers.