Evaluating Cryptographic API Misuse Detectors for Go
Vivi Andersson
vivia@kth.se
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
Martin Monperrus
monperrus@kth.se
KTH Royal Institute of Technology
Stockholm, Sweden
Abstract
Cryptographic API misuse represents a critical vulnerability class
that undermines the security foundations of modern software. Yet, it
remains largely unexplored in Go despite its dominance in security-
critical infrastructure. This paper presents the first comprehensive
study of cryptographic API misuse detection in Go, identifying
and analyzing 4 state-of-the-art tools (CodeQL, Gopher, Gosec,
and Snyk Code) and establishing a consolidated taxonomy of 14
relevant misuse classes. Through an experimental evaluation of
328 security-critical open-source Go projects, we discovered 7,473
cryptographic API misuses, providing insights into the prevalence
and distribution of these vulnerabilities. Our systematic comparison
reveals significant variations in misuse coverage, with immediate
practical implications for security engineers and long-term impli-
cations for research in this domain.
CCS Concepts
• Security and privacy →Software security engineering; •
Software and its engineering →Software defect analysis.
Keywords
Cryptographic API misuse,Security tool comparison,Go
1
Introduction
The misuse of cryptographic APIs is a critical class of code vulnera-
bilities [22]. Cryptographic API misuses are caused by the essential
complexity of cryptographic protocols and the specialized knowl-
edge required to use them correctly [2, 13, 25]. Yet, correct usage of
these cryptographic APIs is required to maintain the security these
protocols promise. When cryptographic APIs are wrongly used, the
major problem is that developers have a false sense of cryptographic
security, founded on mathematical truth, while the actual software
is weak and insecure. For example, skipping certificate validation in
TLS makes applications susceptible to man-in-the-middle attacks
through nation-state firewalls [11].
Cryptographic misuse detection has been extensively studied
in the Java ecosystem [7, 18, 23, 26, 28, 33, 34]. Yet, Java is not the
stack used for most security-critical modern software infrastruc-
ture. Today, Go, aka Golang, is a major stack for infrastructure
software1. It powers certificate authorities (e.g., Let’s Encrypt’s
Boulder), service meshes (e.g., Traefik), container orchestration
platforms (e.g., Kubernetes), and infrastructure-as-code tools (e.g.,
Terraform). Despite Go’s inevitability in security-critical systems,
cryptographic misuse detection remains understudied. To the best
of our knowledge, no prior work has systematically analyzed cryp-
tographic misuse detection for Go. We address this gap with the
first qualitative and quantitative analysis.
1https://go.dev/wiki/GoUsers
Go has a comprehensive cryptographic API suite. For example,
the Go library crypto/tls provides support for the protocol TLS.
As in other ecosystems, Go developers remain prone to insecure
code due to cryptographic API misuse [19, 36]. Compared to Java,
Go’s smaller standard library and more opinionated defaults can
reduce certain algorithm-selection errors, shifting failure modes
toward configuration and usage mistakes. Two recent, high-profile
CVEs highlight these risks: CVE-2024-45337 in golang.org/x/ssh,
where flawed assumptions about public-key authentication enabled
authentication bypasses [31], and CVE-2025-66491 in Traefik, where
Verify=On inverted verification semantics and disabled TLS certifi-
cate checks [24].
We define a cryptographic API misuse as the incorrect usage of
cryptographic functions through an API, which introduces security
vulnerabilities and compromises the theoretical guarantees of the
cryptographic functions used. From there, we study the problem
of cryptographic API misuse in Go as follows. First, we conduct
a survey of tools for detecting cryptographic API misuse in Go.
Next, we analyze those tools (incl. the corresponding paper and
documentation) in order to create a consolidated taxonomy of
cryptographic API misuse for Go. Second, we perform a quantitative
experimental campaign. We collect security-relevant open-source
projects in Go, run all the tools over them, and collect the detected
API misuses. This enables us to study prevalence, tool consensus,
and performance of misuse detection tools in Go.
Results. We study four state-of-the-art tools spanning academic,
open-source, and commercial origins: CodeQL, Gopher, Gosec,
and Snyk Code. We consolidate 14 cryptographic misuse classes
that (i) are relevant in Go and (ii) are supported by at least one
tool; several have appeared in recent CVEs. Running all four tools
on 328 open-source projects yields 7,473 detected API misuses,
enabling a systematic comparison across misuse classes. These
findings help practitioners (e.g., Kubernetes security engineers)
choose and interpret tools, acknowledging, for instance, that not
all provide character-level precision, and highlight research needs,
notably the formalization and enforcement of API-level security
invariants. We also release a replication package to facilitate follow-
up work.2
Contributions.
• The first systematic analysis of the crypto-misuse problem
space in the Go infrastructure domain.
• A large-scale experiment collecting 7,473 misuses across
328 notable open-source projects using four state-of-the-art
detection tools.
2https://github.com/ASSERT-KTH/crypto-api-misuse-detectors-go
1
arXiv:2604.24085v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

2
Experimental Methodology
2.1
Research Questions
The objective of this research is to evaluate the state-of-the-art
in detecting cryptographic API misuse in Go. We aim to identify
and analyze the strengths and weaknesses of existing approaches,
structuring the evaluation around two research questions:
RQ1. What is the design space of state-of-the-art tools for detecting
cryptographic API misuses in Go? In this RQ, we aim to 1) identify
the existing tools applicable to go, 2) which types of misuses they
detect, and 3) by which methods. We first identify relevant tools
through a systematic literature search (subsection 2.2), then analyze
their technical design and detection capabilities. For academic tools,
we extract information primarily from the corresponding paper. For
industrial tools, we survey the official documentation. We classify
each tool based on its analysis approach and categorize the types
of cryptographic vulnerabilities each tool detects.
RQ2. To what extent are crypto misuse detection tools for Go consis-
tent with each other? In this RQ, we aim to quantitatively compare
the concrete performance of the considered tools when applied to
real-world Go projects. We start by assembling a representative
dataset of Go modules that depend on cryptographic libraries for
application security (subsection 2.3). Each tool is then run over this
dataset, and its detections are matched and compared.
2.2
Considered Tools
We conduct a systematic search to identify tools for detecting cryp-
tographic API misuse in Go. We start by searching Google Scholar
using the query 'crypto* API misuse detection AND tool'. We
manually review each paper and confirm that it proposes a tool with
Go support. Then, we conducted a broader web search targeting
industry and community-developed tools. Since not all of them
may use the terminology of “misuse”, we focus the search query
on the keyword crypto vulnerability.
We curate a systematic list of tools that meet the following
inclusion criteria: (1) Support for Go, (2) Capability to detect cryp-
tographic API misuse, (3) Available documentation, (4) Active de-
velopment (e.g., a commit in the last 6 months).
Our search yields five tools, of which four meet our criteria.
From academia, we identify Gopher [36], a specialized Go API
misuse detection tool. One academic tool CryptoGo [19] is no
longer available and is therefore excluded. From the industry, we
find three actively maintained tools with Go support. CodeQL [1]
is GitHub’s Datalog-based framework with built-in Go analysis
and rules for detecting cryptographic API issues. Gosec [9] is a
community-developed security checker for Go, and Snyk Code [29]
is a proprietary, free-of-charge, static application testing tool from
the company Snyk. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most
up-to-date and comprehensive list of tools to detect cryptographic
API misuse in Go.
2.3
Open-source Projects Dataset
We base our quantitative evaluations on a dataset of real-world
Go projects from Chen et al. [6]. The original dataset includes 920
unique, highly-starred repositories collected via crawling GitHub
and systematic filtering (removing duplicates, archived, inactive,
and educational repositories). We further refine this dataset as
follows.
Repository Health. We remove archived or unavailable modules
and retain only well-maintained projects with commits in the past
year and stable releases (indicated by non-pre-release Git tags).
Cryptographic Relevance. We exclude projects that do not import
any Go standard crypto packages. Following prior work [7, 33, 35],
we manually assess each project’s cryptographic security relevance,
classifying project types and retaining only those depending on
cryptography for core functionality. For example, Gops3 is excluded
since cryptography is not central to its purpose.
Descriptive Statistics. The final dataset comprises 328 security-
relevant projects, ranging from 7 to over 8 million lines of code
(median: 58,761) (Figure 1). These actively maintained projects
have a median of 9,096 stars and 167 contributors, reflecting strong
community adoption.
Figure 1: Lines of code per repository
2.4
Protocol for RQ1
We conduct a systematic qualitative comparison of the 4 tools iden-
tified in subsection 2.2: CodeQL, Gopher, Gosec, and Snyk Code.
We compare the detection coverage across tools and their technical
implementation.
Taxonomy Rules. To enable systematic comparison across
tools with divergent coverage and classification approaches, we
establish a unified taxonomy of cryptographic misuse issues. Each
rule in our taxonomy represents a distinct type of cryptographic
API misuse that can be detected through static analysis. We begin
by collecting all distinct detection rules from each tool, preserving
their original granularity and categorization. This forms a baseline
of available issues detected across all evaluated tools. We then
merge overlapping rules into common categories. For example,
CodeQL uses a single rule “CWE-327” for detecting TLS issues,
while Gopher represents these as 2 distinct rules. We merge these
into a unified TLS security category. This consolidation creates a
comparable taxonomy across all evaluated tools. We map each issue
to security advisories where available.
We retain each rule’s original severity classification (High, Medium,
Low) as reported by the source. For each tool, we assess which of
the rules is supported. We do so by surveying the accompanying
paper and official documentation.
2.5
Protocol for RQ2
We evaluate the tools’ practical detection capabilities by running
each tool on our dataset and comparing their detections.
3https://github.com/google/gops
2

Table 1: Detection of cryptographic misuses by tools for Golang, per their documentation.
(a) Taxonomy of Cryptographic API Misuses in Go.
(b) Detection support across tools.
Category
ID
Issue
Sev.
Advisory
CodeQL
Gopher
Gosec
Snyk
Cryptographic
Primitives
01
Insecure algorithms
High
CVE-2024-55885
✓
✓
✓
02
Crypto insecure PRNG
Med
CVE-2024-21495
✓
✓
✓
✓
03
Deprecated Go function
Low
–
✓
Key Management
04
Constant/predictable key
High
CVE-2020-1764
✓
05
Short key length
Low
CVE-2023-47640†
✓
✓
✓
✓
06
Static or predictable IV
Med
CVE-2024-41260
✓
✓
Password-based KDF
07
Short salt length
Low
–
✓
08
Predictable salt
Low
–
✓
09
Low hash iterations
Low
CVE-2023-46233†
✓
Transport
Security
10
HTTP protocol
High
CVE-2024-1968†
✓
11
TLS/SSL Issues
High
CVE-2024-23656
✓
✓
✓
✓
Secure Shell
12
Insecure SSH suite
High
CVE-2021-32026
✓
13
No host key validation
High
CVE-2024-41264
✓
✓
✓
Token Auth.
14
No JWT verification
High
CVE-2024-51744
✓
Note. † Non-Go advisories; – no associated advisory.
2.5.1
Tool Configuration and Execution. We select tools that are
available and executable, using only their built-in rules. We exclude
reports in test files when possible, but do not apply further configu-
ration for filtering alerts. Each tool is executed on every applicable
project in our dataset using the mapped rules relevant to that tool.
2.5.2
Cross-tool Detection Matching. We map tool-specific rules
to our unified taxonomy (subsection 3.1), then match detections by
location and rule. For per-rule agreement, we match by (project, file,
line, rule), counting each tool once per combination. This captures
line-level consensus on specific vulnerability types. For overall
agreement, we match by (project, file, line) to measure whether
tools agree that a line contains any vulnerability. Column positions
are omitted as they are inconsistently reported across tools.
2.5.3
Evaluation Metrics. Without ground truth for tool detections,
we rely on manual analysis of detections. We also report median
wall-clock execution time per tool:
Execution Time𝑡= median𝑝∈𝑃
(Time(𝑡, 𝑝))
where Time(𝑡, 𝑝) represents the total execution time for tool 𝑡on
project 𝑝∈𝑃when analyzing all supported rules.
2.5.4
Experimental Setup. We conducted our experiments on a
server running Ubuntu 22.04, equipped with a 36-core Intel Core
i9-10980XE CPU at 3.00 GHz and 125 GB of RAM. Each tool-project
pair runs in a Docker container with 2 CPUs and 9 GB of memory.
We use GNU Parallel4 for scheduling.
3
Qualitative Analysis
3.1
Taxonomy of Cryptographic API Misuses
Our final taxonomy includes 14 distinct misuse issues grouped
into six domains. Table 1a) summarizes these issues, their severity,
and related advisories. Advisories prefixed GO refer to entries in
the Go vulnerability database5 . Each category reflects real-world
patterns observed in production, supported by their implementation
in existing tools and associated security advisories.
4https://www.gnu.org/software/parallel/
5https://pkg.go.dev/vuln/
3.1.1
Cryptographic Primitives. This category targets the usage
of cryptographic algorithms that are considered fundamentally
insecure or deprecated.
Insecure Algorithms. (#01) covers the use of broken cryptographic
primitives. For instance, MD5 has been considered insecure since
2004 due to practical collision attacks [15]. Its continued use in
security-critical contexts leads to vulnerabilities. For example, the
Go web framework Beego used MD5 to generate cache keys (CVE-
2024-55885), risking data integrity. Collisions could let attackers
overwrite legitimate cache entries, serving malicious responses or
enabling unauthorized access.
Insecure Random Number Generation. (#02) covers the use of non-
cryptographic randomness in security contexts. Go’s math/rand
package is predictable and thus insecure [10]. For example, the
Caddy web server’s caddy-security plugin (CVE-2024-21495) used
math/rand to generate OAuth nonces, allowing attackers to predict
values and perform replay attacks with forged requests.
Deprecated Libraries. (#03) relates to the usage of code in the
standard library that is considered inefficient, unmaintained, or
error-prone. As an example, the crypto/elliptic6 package has
been deprecated, superseded by crypto/ecdh, which provides safer
defaults.
3.1.2
Key Management. This category collects issues arising from
improper generation, management, and usage of cryptographic
keys and parameters. Unlike algorithmic weaknesses, where the
primitive itself is flawed, these vulnerabilities arise from poor
key practices that undermine the otherwise secure cryptographic
systems.
Constant/Predictable Keys. (#04) concerns the use of static, hard-
coded, or guessable cryptographic keys. In Kiali (CVE-2020-1764),
a default JWT signing key allowed attackers to forge tokens and
gain unauthorized administrative access to the API and logs.
6https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/elliptic
3

Short Key Length. (#05) addresses cryptographic keys shorter
than current security standards. HMAC keys should be at least
128 bits to resist brute-force attacks [30]. For example, DataHub
(CVE-2023-47640) used an 80-bit SHA-1 HMAC for cookie sign-
ing, allowing attackers to brute-force the key and gain elevated
privileges.
Static or Predictable IVs. (#06) concerns the need for unique,
unpredictable initialization vectors (IVs). Static or predictable IVs
in block ciphers expose ciphertexts to dictionary attacks [21]. For
instance, NetBird (CVE-2024-41260) used a hardcoded IV in CBC
encryption, causing deterministic outputs that let attackers detect
repeated plaintexts or build ciphertext dictionaries.
3.1.3
Password-based Key Derivation Functions. This category cov-
ers issues in the cryptographic use of passwords, specifically password-
based key derivation functions (PBKDFs). Algorithms such as Ar-
gon2 [5] and bcrypt [27] convert passwords into cryptographic keys
through computationally intensive operations, making brute-force
guessing significantly harder.
Short Salt Length. (#07) in PBKDFs increases the risk of hash
collisions across users, making lookup table attacks more feasible.
For a small salt space, attackers can precompute hash values for
common passwords and reuse them [27].
Predictable Salts. (#08) addresses vulnerabilities from low-entropy
or static salt generation. Hardcoded or predictable salts make hashes
guessable via precomputed lookups. For instance, the Duplicacy
backup tool7 used a hardcoded salt, undermining salting and en-
abling lookup-table attacks.
Low Hash Iterations. (#09) in PBKDFs reduces computational cost
for attackers, enabling faster brute-force attacks. For instance, a low
bcrypt cost parameter8 weakens password protection. A notable
real-world case is crypto-js, which defaulted to a single PBKDF2
iteration (CVE-2023-46233), leaving users exposed to significantly
reduced security.
3.1.4
Transport Security. This category concerns the secure trans-
mission of data over networks and comprises two rules.
HTTP Protocol. (#10) concerns transmitting sensitive data over
unencrypted HTTP, exposing it to eavesdropping and man-in-the-
middle attacks. This occurs when applications send credentials or
personal data without HTTPS. For example, CVE-2024-1968 af-
fected the Scrapy framework, which failed to remove Authorization
headers during HTTPS-to-HTTP redirects, leaking authentication
tokens in plaintext.
SSL/TLS Issues. (#11) covers three classes of vulnerabilities in SS-
L/TLS configuration. First, outdated protocol versions (SSL 3.0, TLS
1.0, 1.1) contain design flaws [16], enabling attacks like POODLE
[8]; for example, CVE-2024-23656 in Dex exposed deprecated TLS
versions. Second, insecure cipher suites rely on weak algorithms
such as RC4 or lack forward secrecy. Third, skipping certificate
verification allows server impersonation via man-in-the-middle
attacks.
7https://github.com/gilbertchen/duplicacy/issues/137
8https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/crypto/bcrypt
Table 2: Tool properties for misuse detection.
Tool
Available
Open Source
Rule Selection
Column Prec.
Severity
Confidence
CodeQL
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
Gopher
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
Gosec
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Snyk
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
3.1.5
Secure shell (SSH). issues concerns the configuration and
usage of the Go crypto/ssh9 package.
Insecure SSH Suite. (#12) covers configurations using outdated
ciphers (e.g., CBC mode), which enable plaintext recovery via
padding oracle attacks [3]. Although Go’s SSH package disables
these by default, users can re-enable them, as seen in NATS (CVE-
2021-32026), where insecure overrides weakened security.
No Host Key Verification. (#13) arises when SSH key exchange
skips host verification, enabling man-in-the-middle attacks. In Go,
this typically results from using ssh.InsecureIgnoreHostKey.
Casdoor (CVE-2024-41264) exhibited this flaw, allowing attackers
to impersonate trusted servers and intercept sensitive data.
3.1.6
Token-based Authentication. This category includes one mis-
use related to JSON Web Tokens (JWTs), widely used for web
authentication [17].
No JWT Verification. (#14) refers to missing signature checks, al-
lowing attackers to forge tokens and access protected resources [17].
In golang-jwt/jwt10 (CVE-2024-51744), unclear error-handling
documentation led developers to accept invalid tokens.
3.2
Tool Characteristics
We compare key characteristics distinguishing the tools in our
study. Table 2 summarizes their availability, configurability, and
analytical capabilities.
Availability & Open-source. All four tools are publicly available.
CodeQL and Gosec are fully open-source11, allowing modification
and redistribution. In contrast, Snyk Code and Gopher are closed-
source: Snyk Code as a commercial product and Gopher as a
research binary-only.
Custom Rules. All tools support adding new detection rules,
but with varying flexibility. CodeQL and Gosec offer fine-grained
control, allowing inclusion/exclusion of specific rules for targeted
analysis. Gopher and Snyk Code lack this suppression feature,
forcing users to apply their full rule sets.
Detection Output Characteristics. The tools differ in how precisely
they report findings (granularity, severity, confidence). Most tools
(CodeQL, Gosec, Snyk Code) report at column-level precision,
while Gopher reports only by line. All except Gopher assign
severity levels, and only Gosec includes confidence ratings, helping
users prioritize results.
9https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/crypto/ssh
10https://github.com/golang-jwt/jwt
11https://opensource.org/osd
4

Listing 1: Simplified Rule 02 (CWE-338) detection in CodeQL.
1
class InsecureRandomSource extends Source, DataFlow::CallNode {
2
InsecureRandomSource() { getTarget().getPackage().getPath() = "math/rand"
}}
3
4
class CryptographicSink extends Sink {
5
CryptographicSink() {
6
exists(Function fn, string pkg, string name |
7
pkg.regexpMatch("crypto/.*") and not (pkg="crypto/rand" and
name="Read") and
8
exists(DataFlow::CallNode c | c.getTarget()=fn and
this=c.getAnArgument()))
9
} }
Finding 1 The tools vary in availability, configurability, and
detection precision. An ideal tool offers rule selection,
column-level accuracy, and severity and confidence ratings.
Only Gosec meets all these criteria.
3.3
Detection Capabilities
We analyze each tool’s coverage of cryptographic API misuse issues
and their detection methods, assessing how comprehensively they
address our taxonomy (Table 1b).
CodeQL. detects five misuse rules, emphasizing high-severity
issues (three of five). It uniquely identifies unverified JWTs in
golang-jwt/jwt (#14). CodeQL operates in two stages: first, it
converts the codebase into a fact database capturing syntactic and
semantic relationships [1]; second, QL queries analyze this data,
often through data-flow reasoning. For instance, Rule #02 (shown in
Listing 1) models insecure randomness as a taint-analysis problem,
tracking flows from math/rand to crypto APIs while excluding
benign cases.
Gopher. covers 13 of the 14 rules (excluding JWT authentication).
It targets multiple Go standard library APIs. Gopher applies taint
tracking on the SSA representation [36] and supports dynamically
updatable rules. For example, when encountering an indirect refer-
ence to a cryptographic primitive (e.g., rsa.GenerateKey), it can
add new rules to detect misuses that do not directly invoke known
APIs.
Gosec. covers six rules across four categories. Like Gopher, it
uses SSA analysis for certain checks (e.g., short keys, static IVs) [9],
while others rely on simpler AST inspection. For instance, insecure
randomness (#02) is detected by matching function calls against a
blacklist.
Snyk Code. supports four rules overlapping with
including
insecure algorithms (#01) and SSL/TLS misconfigurations (#11). It
applies static analysis enhanced by an “AI engine” [29], though
implementation details remain proprietary.
Finding 2 Coverage ranges from 4 (Snyk Code) to 13
(Gopher) of 14 patterns. Primary detection mode is taint
tracking over intermediate representations.
4
Quantitative Analysis
We examine how effectively the 4 considered tools that are available
(CodeQL, Gopher, Gosec, Snyk Code) detect cryptographic API
issues across our dataset of 328 open-source projects.
4.1
Detection Prevalence
4.1.1
Reliability and Coverage. Table 3 shows variability in tool
reliability and coverage. Snyk Code and Gosec analyze all projects,
while Gopher fails on 75 (22.9%) and CodeQL on 27 (8.2%).
Detection coverage varies widely: Snyk Code flags 92.7% of all
projects, Gosec 84.5%, Gopher 50.0%, and CodeQL 28.4%. Most
projects are flagged by at least one tool.
4.1.2
Detection Patterns. Table 4 summarizes detection magnitude
per tool and misuse category across the dataset. For instance, Cod-
eQL reports 14 instances of insecure PRNG usage. Missing support
for a rule is indicated by a “–”.
Detection varies widely, even within the same category (e.g.,
#11). Such discrepancies stem from differing definitions of what
constitutes a misuse. For example, in rule #02 (insecure PRNGs),
Gopher, though claiming support, reports none, while Gosec flags
2,517, CodeQL 14, and Snyk Code 17. While it is known that
assumptions may differ, having such differences makes it very hard
for researchers and practitioners to compare performance. Gopher
shows the broadest coverage, uniquely detecting issues for rules
#03, #04, #07–#10, and #12. However, rules #03 (deprecation) and
#10 (HTTP) yield excessive warnings, suggesting overly aggressive
heuristics.
Snyk Code detects four rule types, particularly flagging insecure
algorithms (#01) 1,259 times, mostly involving MD5 and SHA-1
Table 3: Tool execution outcomes across the dataset.
CodeQL
Gopher
Gosec
Snyk
Projects analyzed (%)
91.8
77.1
100
100
With findings (% of analyzed)
30.9
64.8
84.5
92.7
With findings (% of dataset)
28.4
50.0
84.5
92.7
Table 4: Detection counts per rule across analysis tools.
ID
Description
CodeQL
Gopher
Gosec
Snyk
Total
01
Insecure algorithms
–
498
584
1259
2341
02
Crypto insecure PRNG
14
0
2517
17
2548
03
Deprecated Go function
–
99
–
–
99
04
Constant/predictable key
–
44
–
–
44
05
Short key length
11
12
7
5
35
06
Static/predictable IV
–
5
11
–
16
07
Short salt length
–
18
–
–
18
08
Predictable salt
–
13
–
–
13
09
Low hash iterations
–
59
–
–
59
10
HTTP protocol
–
197
–
–
197
11
TLS/SSL Issues
210
300
1049
474
2033
12
Insecure SSH suite
–
5
–
–
5
13
No host key validation
15
16
28
–
59
14
No JWT verification
6
–
–
–
6
All
256
1266
4196
1755
7473
5

Figure 2: Detection agreement across all rules shows that
many detections are tool-unique.
usage. Gosec also reports these, but only at import statements,
producing fewer findings.
Manual analysis shows that the considered tools do not dis-
tinguish whether these usages are security relevant or not. For
instance, Gopher flags all occurrences of chacha20.NewUnauth
enticatedCipher, even when the output is subsequently authen-
ticated (e.g., with Ed25519).
Finding 3 Snyk Code and Gosec run reliably on all projects;
Gopher fails often yet detects the widest range, sometimes
excessively. Large detection discrepancies reveal inconsistent
assumptions complicating comparison.
4.2
Tool Consensus
We measure agreement at the line level, and for rule-specific anal-
ysis, require the same rule at the same line. High overlap sug-
gests stronger confidence, while tool-specific detections may reflect
unique capabilities or false positives; see subsubsection 2.5.2.
4.2.1
Aggregate Agreement. Across 14 misuse types, we identify
6,152 unique detections. Gosec accounts for most (67.4%), followed
by Snyk Code (28.0%), Gopher (16.9%), and CodeQL (4.1%) (Fig-
ure 2). Most findings are tool-specific: Gosec reports 92.6% unique
locations, Snyk Code 63.5%, suggesting complementary techniques
but also false positive risk. Conversely, 81.7% of CodeQL alerts
overlap with others. Only 1.3% of detections are shared by all tools,
underscoring fragmented, immature detection in Go.
4.2.2
Rule-Specific Agreement. We examine three representative
rules with the highest tool coverage (#05, #11, #13) to reveal finer-
grained consensus patterns (Figure 3).
Short Key Lengths. (#05) is a covered by all four tools. Figure 3a is
the exhaustive analysis of the consensus over all flagged alarms. Go-
pher reports 11 unique detections missed by others, while CodeQL,
Gosec, and Snyk Code agree on 5 locations not flagged by Gopher.
During manual analysis we observe that 4 of 5 issues flagged by all
3 tools, except Gopher, are security-irrelevant; they occur in mock
and example code and are unlikely to end up in production code.
There is one relevant detection that Gopher misses concerning an
RSA key length of 1024, representing a false negative.
Gopher ’s 11 unique detections reflect a broader interpretation
of the rule. Six occur in one project, where it flags unkeyed hashes
such as blake2b.New512(nil), which are intended for hashing
rather than MACs12. Since static analysis cannot infer context, Go-
pher conservatively flags these cases. In another project, Gopher
identifies low-entropy HMAC usage through a wrapped function
call. Although this instance is used for file fingerprinting and not
security-relevant, it demonstrates how dynamic rule updates allow
Gopher to detect issues missed by other tools. Overall, for this rule,
Gopher provides the most advanced detection. With improved
robustness (Table 3), it could become a highly effective tool for
identifying insecure code patterns.
SSL/TLS Issues. (#11) yield 1,391 line-level detections, with over-
laps shown in Figure 3b. All tools agree on 80 detections, while
Gosec and Snyk Code dominate unique findings with 795 and 209,
respectively. We randomly sampled five detections from each set.
Gosec mainly flags TLS version settings and disabled certificate
validation via InsecureSkipVerify. Three of five samples are false
positives where TLS is properly configured (≥1.2), or validation is
not actually disabled, suggesting limited sensitivity to configuration
values. The remaining two cases are insecure only if developers
explicitly enable risky options.
Snyk Code shows no false positives among its five samples:
three correctly identify intentional insecure configurations, and
two point to potentially security-relevant issues, indicating stronger
contextual awareness than Gosec. For the five detections shared by
all tools, all concern InsecureSkipVerify and are true positives:
four clearly disable verification, and one reimplements it through a
custom method.
SSH Host Key Validation. (#13) issues are reported by CodeQL,
Gopher, and Gosec. These detections focus on how the SSH
HostKeyCallback is implemented. Across tools, there is agreement
on 10 alerts, with CodeQL identifying 3 unique cases and Gosec
10. We sampled five alerts from each tool’s unique findings.
Gosec behaves similarly to rule #05: it detects true positives
of the well-known InsecureIgnoreHostKey pattern (1) but also
includes a testing file (1) and misses contextual cues such as custom
callbacks (1) or explicitly benign configurations (2).
Samples where all three tools overlap (five alerts) show higher
precision, with all being true positives. One of these is intentionally
configurable for contexts where no known hosts are available.
CodeQL stands out by detecting issues beyond the basic
Insecure IgnoreHostKey pattern. It also identifies cases where
custom SSH callbacks disable host verification by returning nil,
demonstrating its capacity to analyze higher-order functions and
complex data flows.
Finding 4 Detection profiles vary by type: Gopher offers
broad coverage, Snyk Code context-aware precision,
CodeQL unique SSH detection (#13), while Gosec produces
most false positives. Cross-tool agreement correlates with
true positives, suggesting ensemble approaches.
12https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/crypto/blake2b
6

(a) Rule 05 (short key length)
(b) Rule 11 (SSL/TLS issues)
(c) Rule 13 (No key validation)
Figure 3: Tool detection overlaps for 3 representative rules. Rule 05 is extreme in the lack of agreement. Rule 11 shows that
many detections can be separately confirmed by 2 tools. Rule 13 illustrates rare detections, appropriate for manual analysis.
4.3
Execution Time
Table 5 reports median execution time per project, which matters
for feasibility in CI and for scaling to large corpora.CodeQL has
the highest overhead due to database creation (144s), for a median
total of 219s. Snyk Code is fastest at 16s even when running all
available rules. Gosec follows at 29s, while Gopher is slower at
63s, reflecting its broader rule coverage.
Finding 5 CodeQL is the most time-consuming tool, while
Snyk Code runs 13× faster on median.
Table 5: Median time for setup and analysis per project.
CodeQL
Gopher
Gosec
Snyk*
Setup (s)
144
–
–
–
Analysis (s)
70
63
29
16
Note. *For all available Snyk rules, including irrelevant ones.
5
Threats to Validity
External Validity. Our 2021 dataset may not capture newer Go
projects or emerging misuse patterns, though this is partly mit-
igated by focusing on long-standing, popular projects.
Internal Validity. Mapping tool-specific rules to consolidated
misuse categories involved subjective judgment, which may affect
conclusions about tool agreement and comparative performance.
Construct Validity. Our taxonomy reflects the scope of evalu-
ated tools and may not cover all real-world Go misuses, but it is
representative of current automated detection capabilities.
6
Related Work
Cryptographic misuse detection has been extensively studied in
the Java ecosystem, with several works conducting comparative
evaluations of static analysis tools.
Zhang et al. [35] evaluate six tools (CogniCrypt, CryptoGuard,
CryptoTutor, FindSecBugs, SonarQube, Xanitizer) across three Java
benchmarks and show that developers often reject tool alerts due
to low precision. Ami et al. [4] propose MASC, a mutation-based
framework for testing detectors under realistic conditions, revealing
key practical limitations. Chen et al. [7] analyze false positives and
ineffective true positives in CogniCryptSAST, CryptoGuard, and
CryptoREX, providing recommendations for improving precision.
Wickert et al. [33] study CogniCryptSAST alerts in 210 enterprise
projects and find most misuses to be high severity, underscoring
their security relevance.
Motivated by recent advances in LLMs, several studies compare
them with traditional static analysis for cryptographic misuse de-
tection. Masood and Martin [20] benchmark GPT-4o-mini against
CryptoGuard, CogniCrypt, CogniCryptSAST, and Snyk Code in
Java. Xia et al. [34] evaluate five LLMs on two Java benchmarks,
while Firouzi et al. [12] use prompt engineering with ChatGPT
to compare it with CryptoGuard. Overall, LLMs show broader
detection coverage but higher false positive rates.
Cryptographic misuse detection has also been explored in Python.
Wickert et al. [32] present LICMA, while Frantz et al. [13] introduce
PyCryptoBench and evaluate Cryptolation against three industry
tools on 940 Python projects. Guo et al. [14] propose CryptoPyt and
compare it with five tools across two benchmarks. These works
highlight that results from Java do not generalize directly, empha-
sizing the need for language-specific approaches.
Finally, we review prior work on cryptographic misuse detection
in Go. Li et al. introduce CryptoGo, the first Go-specific tool, cover-
ing 12 misuse types and uncovering issues across all categories in
120 open-source projects. Building on this, Zhang et al. [36] propose
Gopher, improving CryptoGo’s detection, and compare both tools
to 145 popular Go projects. Their study, however, excludes other Go
detectors. We address this gap with the first large-scale comparative
evaluation of cryptographic misuse detection tools on real-world,
security-relevant Go codebases.
7
Conclusion
This paper presented the first systematic study of cryptographic API
misuse detection in Go. We evaluated four tools (CodeQL, Gopher,
Gosec, and Snyk Code) across 14 rule classes, reporting 7,473
misuses in 328 open-source projects. Our results reveal major gaps
in coverage, precision, and consensus among tools; overlaps are
higher-precision, making ensembles a practical near-term strategy
while highlighting the need for standardized detection. Future
7

work should combine tool strengths to better support Go security
engineers.