Text Steganography with Dynamic Codebook and
Multimodal Large Language Model
Jianxin Gao
jxgao@cau.edu.cn
China Agricultural University
Beijing, China
Ruohan Lei
lrh07@cau.edu.cn
China Agricultural University
Beijing, China
Wanli Peng∗
wlpeng@cau.edu.cn
China Agricultural University
Beijing, China
Abstract
With the popularity of the large language models (LLMs), text
steganography has achieved remarkable performance. However,
existing methods still have some issues: (1) For the white-box par-
adigm, this steganography behavior is prone to exposure due to
sharing the off-the-shelf language model between Alice and Bob.
(2) For the black-box paradigm, these methods lack flexibility and
practicality since Alice and Bob should share the fixed codebook
while sharing a specific extracting prompt for each steganographic
sentence. In order to improve the security and practicality, we intro-
duce a black-box text steganography with a dynamic codebook and
multimodal large language model. Specifically, we first construct
a dynamic codebook via some shared session configuration and
a multimodal large language model. Then an encrypted stegano-
graphic mapping is designed to embed secret messages during the
steganographic caption generation. Furthermore, we introduce a
feedback optimization mechanism based on reject sampling to en-
sure accurate extraction of secret messages. Experimental results
show that the proposed method outperforms existing white-box
text steganography methods in terms of embedding capacity and
text quality. Meanwhile, the proposed method has achieved better
practicality and flexibility than the existing black-box paradigm in
some popular online social networks.
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies →Natural language generation; •
Security and privacy →Human and societal aspects of security
and privacy.
Keywords
Generative Text Steganography; Multimodal Large Language Mod-
els; Black-box; Dynamic Codebook
ACM Reference Format:
Jianxin Gao, Ruohan Lei, and Wanli Peng. 2026. Text Steganography with
Dynamic Codebook and Multimodal Large Language Model. In Proceedings
of the 34th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (ACM Multimedia
∗Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ACM Multimedia 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
2026), November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 9 pages.
1
Introduction
Text steganography is an active research topic in the fields of infor-
mation hiding and neural language generation (NLG). It is the art
of embedding secret information into innocent text data, aiming
to covertly transmit secret information between Alice (sender) and
Bob (receiver) [2, 6, 20]. In the steganography field, the innocent
text is named as cover text. The generated text with the secret mes-
sage is called stego text. Due to its inherent robustness, text data has
become an appropriate carrier for steganography in online social
networks (OSNs), such as Ins, X, Weibo, WeChat, etc. [30, 31]. Early
text steganography mainly relied on modifying existing text, for
example, through synonym substitution or controlled rewriting.
Although these methods can preserve part of the original meaning,
they usually provide limited payload and are often vulnerable to
linguistic or statistical detection.
In the past decades, language models based on deep learning
have achieved superior performance in a variety of neural language
generation tasks. These kinds of tasks aim to generate realistic
and plausible textual content that is indistinguishable from human-
written text, which opens up a new research avenue for highly
secure text steganography, namely, generative text steganography
(GTS) [9–11, 13, 14, 16, 25, 27, 29, 30]. The paradigm of GTS can be
formulated as follows:
𝑇𝑠= 𝑓𝐿𝑀

𝑇𝑝,𝑘,𝑔(𝑚)

(1)
where 𝑇𝑠is generated stego text. 𝑓𝐿𝑀[·] represents an off-the-shelf
language model. 𝑇𝑝denotes a prefix or context. 𝑘is a privacy key
shared between Alice and Bob. 𝑚is secret messages. 𝑔(·) denotes a
steganographic mapping function that is elaborately designed to
embed secret messages. The difficulties of GTS mainly come from
𝑓𝐿𝑀[·] and 𝑔(·). The former inclines to cause quality reduction
of stego text since most GTS methods generate stego texts in the
inference phase of the off-the-shelf language models. The latter
mainly impacts the security of the GTS method, in particular anti-
steganalysis and statistical imperceptibility. In the GTS task, we
need to make a satisfied trade-off between text quality and security,
which is challenging. It is obvious that using a better language
model 𝑓𝐿𝑀[·] can significantly boost the semantical consistency
and fluency of generated stego texts since GTS can be regarded as
a special text generation task under the control of secret messages.
Although these methods substantially improved the trade-off
among embedding capacity, text quality, and statistical security,
they have a behavior security risk due to the white-box setting.
Namely, in practice, Alice and Bob require sharing the off-the-shelf
arXiv:2604.20269v1 [cs.CR] 22 Apr 2026

ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Your Name et al.
language model, which is prone to exposing the steganographic be-
havior since the deployment of a shared language model, especially
the large language model, is a special behavior. In order to enhance
the behavior security, Wu et al. [26] proposed an LLM-Stega based
on prompt engineering. The main goal of this method is conceal-
ing the steganographic behavior with the common usages of large
language models. However, the black-box method lacks flexibility
and practicality since it relies heavily on a shared codebook, and
the correct extraction of different stego sentences requires different
extraction prompts.
To address these problems, we propose a black-box text steganog-
raphy method with a dynamic codebook and a multimodal large
language model (MLLM). The key idea is to use public visual context
to support the construction of a dynamic codebook so that secret ex-
traction no longer relies on a fixed shared codebook across different
communication rounds. Under this framework, the MLLM serves
not only as a generation interface but also as a synchronization
tool between the sender and the receiver [1, 3, 15, 17]. In addition,
we develop a feedback optimization mechanism to improve the
reliability of codebook reconstruction and secret extraction in the
black-box setting. As a result, the proposed method offers satisfac-
tory practicality and flexibility while preserving strong text quality
and embedding capacity.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(1) We propose a black-box text steganography framework that
constructs a dynamic codebook for each communication
round from public image and caption context, rather than
relying on a fixed reusable codebook.
(2) We design a complete embedding and extraction process
that combines dynamic codebook construction, encrypted
message mapping, and a feedback optimization mechanism
to support accurate recovery in a black-box setting.
(3) We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate text quality,
embedding capacity, statistical imperceptibility, resistance to
steganalysis, and robustness in realistic online settings. The
results show that the proposed method achieves a strong
balance between practicality and performance.
2
Related Work
White-box linguistic steganography. Early linguistic steganogra-
phy mainly hid messages by editing existing text, such as synonym
substitution or controlled rewriting [4, 5]. More recent edit-based
work revisited this paradigm with masked language models, show-
ing that neural editing can improve the trade-off between payload
and imperceptibility [24]. With the development of neural lan-
guage models, research further shifted toward generation-based
steganography, where secret bits are embedded during token gen-
eration. Representative examples include RNN/LSTM-based meth-
ods [11, 29] and coding-based methods such as arithmetic coding
and its variants [7, 31], which substantially improved the trade-off
between text quality and embedding capacity. Another major line
of work pursues stronger distributional security. ADG [30] embeds
messages by adaptively grouping candidate tokens into approxi-
mately equal-probability sets, while later methods such as Discop,
minimum-entropy-coupling-based steganography, METEOR, and
SparSamp [9, 10, 14, 25] further aim to preserve the original sam-
pling distribution more faithfully. Despite their differences, these
methods generally assume white-box access to token probabilities,
and often require the communicating parties to share the same local
generative model or decoding state, which limits their applicability
in realistic API-only settings.
Black-box linguistic steganography. As closed-source LLM ser-
vices become increasingly prevalent, recent work has begun to
explore black-box linguistic steganography under API or user-
interface access. In this setting, the design focus shifts from direct
control over token probabilities to protocol coordination through
prompts and model outputs. Recent examples include zero-shot gen-
erative linguistic steganography based on in-context learning [16]
and LLM-Stega [26], which performs embedding and extraction
through pre-shared keyword sets, encrypted mappings, and rejec-
tion sampling. More recently, tokenization inconsistency has been
identified as an important robustness issue in LLM-based steganog-
raphy, showing that reliable recovery depends not only on text
quality but also on whether sender and receiver can maintain a
stable hidden protocol under mismatched tokenization [27]. These
studies improve practical deployability by removing the need for
logit access. However, existing black-box methods still rely heavily
on reusable protocol materials, such as fixed lexical inventories,
static cross-session mappings, or other persistent local artifacts.
By contrast, our method reconstructs the decoding structure on
demand for each session from a one-time private convention and
public multimodal context, rather than depending on persistent
reusable local artifacts.
Multimodal large language models. Recent multimodal large lan-
guage models (MLLMs) have demonstrated strong capabilities in
image understanding, visual grounding, and instruction-following
caption generation, making them practical black-box interfaces
for multimodal interaction [1, 3, 8, 15, 17]. These capabilities are
directly relevant to our setting: visual grounding supports reliable
recovery of image-side semantic anchors, instruction following
supports constrained caption generation, and image-conditioned
generation allows public visual content to serve as a shared synchro-
nization substrate. However, existing MLLM research has primarily
focused on perception and generation tasks, rather than covert
communication. To the best of our knowledge, prior black-box lin-
guistic steganography methods have not used public image–caption
context to reconstruct a session-specific codebook. Our work fills
this gap by turning multimodal public context into a session-level
synchronization interface.
3
The Proposed Methodology
As shown in Figure 1, the proposed DyCo-Stega framework consists
of three main stages: Shared Session Configuration, Secret Mes-
sage Embedding, and Secret Message Extraction. In practice, Alice
leverages a multimodal large language model to generate an image
with a specific semantic controlled by the seed words. Then these
seed words are used to construct a dynamic codebook for mapping
the secret message bits while generating a steganographic image
caption. The generated semantic image and steganographic caption
are sent to Bob via some OSNs. Finally, Bob uses the semantic image

Text Steganography with Dynamic Codebook and
Multimodal Large Language Model
ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Algorithm 1 Image generation based on reject sampling
Require: Scene description, seed words, generation prompt tem-
plate, extraction prompt, image feedback prompt template, im-
age generator, multimodal LLM
Ensure: Image 𝐼
1: accepted ←False
2: 𝑃gen ←construct generation prompt using generation prompt
template, scene description, and seed words
3: 𝐼←generate an image using image generator with 𝑃gen
4: while not accepted do
5:
Kext ←extract seed words from image 𝐼using multimodal
LLM with extraction prompt
6:
if Kext = seed words then
7:
accepted ←True
8:
else
9:
𝑃fb
𝐼←construct image feedback prompt using image
feedback prompt template, seed words, and Kext
10:
𝑃upd
𝐼
←get update prompt using multimodal LLM with
image 𝐼and 𝑃fb
𝐼
11:
𝐼←refine image 𝐼using image generator with 𝑃upd
𝐼
12:
end if
13: end while
14: if accepted then
15:
return Image 𝐼
16: end if
and side information to reconstruct the same codebook and then
correctly extracts the secret messages.
3.1
Shared Session Configuration
This stage aims to establish a shared session configuration, which
is shared with Bob for the correct extraction of secret messages.
The configuration contains a pre-shared key PSK, the ordered seed
words K𝑜𝑟𝑑, and an anchor sequence AncSeq. Specifically, an im-
age is generated by using the seed words and an MLLM with a
reject sampling mechanism, where the generation prompt should
be updated iteratively to ensure Bob can extract the same seed
words. The scene description and the seed words are used to con-
struct a generation prompt. The generated image, together with
an extraction prompt, is fed into a multimodal LLM to extract a
set of seed words, denoted by Kext. If Kext does not exactly match
the seed words, an image feedback prompt is used to analyze the
discrepancy and produce an update prompt for image refinement.
This reject sampling procedure continues until the extracted seed
words exactly match the original seed words. The algorithm detail
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Then, the seed words are sorted deterministically according
to their word frequencies in a public dictionary D, yielding the
ordered seed word list Kord = (𝑘1, . . . ,𝑘𝐾). Using Kord, a pre-shared
key PSK, and a public anchor sequence AncSeq (e.g., punctuation
patterns or emojis), the session parameters are computed as follows:
(Φ, Θ) = 𝑔(PSK, Kord, AncSeq),
(2)
where Φ = (𝛼,𝑏, 𝜎) contains the codebook size 𝛼, the bit capacity
per codeword 𝑏, and the shaping parameter 𝜎. The parameter Θ
is introduced to increase the unpredictability of the session seeds.
Algorithm 2 Dynamic codebook construction
Require: Ordered seed word list K𝑜𝑟𝑑= {𝑘1, . . . ,𝑘𝐾}, public dic-
tionary D, codebook size 𝛼, bit capacity per codeword 𝑏, shap-
ing parameter 𝜎, session seed 𝜉, reverse-definition weight 𝜆rev,
forward-context weight 𝜆fwd, prefix weight 𝜆pre
Ensure: Dynamic codebook C𝐷
1: 𝑁←2𝑏,
score(𝑤) ←0, ∀𝑤∈D
2: for all 𝑘∈K do
3:
for all 𝑤∈D do
4:
if 𝑘appears in the definition text of 𝑤:
score(𝑤) ←score(𝑤) + 𝜆rev
5:
if 𝑤appears in the definition text, example sentences,
or synonyms of 𝑘:
score(𝑤) ←score(𝑤) + 𝜆fwd
6:
if 𝑤has prefix 𝑘:
score(𝑤) ←score(𝑤) + 𝜆pre
7:
end for
8: end for
9: Vcand ←the top 𝛼−𝐾non-seed words ranked by score(𝑤)
10: sort Vcand by descending dictionary frequency
11: Vsem ←place K𝑜𝑟𝑑in the first 𝐾positions, followed by Vcand
12: computes weight: 𝑞𝑗←exp

−(𝑗−1)2
2𝜎2

, ∀𝑗= 1, . . . , 𝛼
13: obtain the final probability: 𝑝𝑗←
𝑞𝑗
Í𝛼
𝑖=1 𝑞𝑖
14: permute {(𝑤𝑗, 𝑝𝑗)}𝛼
𝑗=1 into {( ˜𝑤𝑗, ˜𝑝𝑗)}𝛼
𝑗=1
15: repeated sampling: 𝐿𝑗←˜𝑝𝑗· 𝑁, ∀𝑗= 1, . . . , 𝛼
16: 𝐵0 ←0,
𝐵𝑗←Í𝑗
𝑖=1 𝐿𝑖,
Ω𝑗←[𝐵𝑗−1, 𝐵𝑗), ∀𝑗= 1, . . . , 𝛼
17: return C𝐷= {( ˜𝑤𝑗, Ω𝑗)}𝛼
𝑗=1
AncSeq is specified by the sender and can be directly extracted from
the OSNs. Both the PSK and the function 𝑔are established via a
one-time private agreement.
Finally, an integer session seed 𝜉is derived from Φ and Θ using
a cryptographic hash function H (·) (e.g., SHA-256) and an integer
mapping function Hash2Int(·):
𝜉= Hash2Int H (𝛼∥𝑏∥𝜎∥Θ).
(3)
The seed 𝜉determines the ordering during codebook construction
and masks the within-interval offsets during secret message em-
bedding.
3.2
Secret Message Embedding
Given the above shared session configuration, we first construct
the dynamic codebook C𝐷and then map the secret message to a
codeword C𝐷together with an interval offset.
Dynamic Codebook Construction The dynamic codebook
spans the integer range [0, 𝑁), where 𝑁= 2𝑏. The construction
consists of five stages: seed expansion, selection and ranking, prob-
ability shaping, seed-based ordering, and repeated sampling. We
summarize the overall process in Algorithm 2.
(1) Seeds Expansion. DyCo-Stega expands the seed words into
a broader candidate set using a public dictionary D. Specifically,
candidate retrieval follows three dictionary-based routes. Reverse-
definition matching retrieves candidate words whose dictionary
definitions contain a seed word. Forward-context matching retrieves

ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Your Name et al.
Figure 1: The overall framework of DyCo-Stega. The figure shows the three main steps. Crucially, the dynamic codebook
construction is executed independently by both parties without transmitting the codebook itself.
candidate words that appear in the dictionary entry of a seed word,
including its definition text, example sentences, and synonyms.
Prefix matching retrieves candidate words that use a seed word as
their prefix. Each route contributes a fixed weight, and the final
score of a candidate word is obtained by summing the weights of all
matched routes. This dictionary-based expansion requires neither
local LLM weights nor embedding models. The specific weights we
assign, the complete calculation procedure, and detailed step-by-
step examples are all provided in the Supplementary Material.
(2) Selection and Ranking. To construct the final semantic pool
𝑉sem, we retain all seed words and select the 𝛼−𝐾highest-scoring
candidates. The selected words are then divided into two groups:
the seed words and the remaining 𝛼−𝐾words. Within each group,
words are independently sorted in descending order according to
their dictionary frequencies. This procedure ensures that 𝑉sem is
deterministic while prioritizing the seed words and high-frequency
words.
(3) Probability Shaping. To improve the linguistic quality of the
generated stego captions, we assign a probability distribution that
gives higher-ranked words larger probabilities in 𝑉sem. Since the
words in 𝑉sem are already sorted by descending dictionary fre-
quency, this design makes seed words and high-frequency words
more likely to be selected. Let 𝑗∈{1, . . . , 𝛼} denote the rank of the
word 𝑤𝑗in 𝑉sem, and let 𝜎> 0 be the shaping parameter derived
from the shared session configuration. A half-Gaussian kernel func-
tion computes the unnormalized weight 𝑞𝑗for each rank, which is
then normalized to obtain the final probability 𝑝𝑗:
𝑞𝑗= exp

−(𝑗−1)2
2𝜎2

,
𝑝𝑗=
𝑞𝑗
Í𝛼
𝑖=1 𝑞𝑖
.
(4)
(4) Seed-Based Ordering. Using the session seed 𝜉to initialize a
pseudo-random number generator (PRNG), we reorder the origi-
nal word-probability pairs (𝑤𝑗, 𝑝𝑗) into a new sequence ( ˜𝑤𝑗, ˜𝑝𝑗).
This reordering changes only the position of each word within the
sequence, and every word strictly retains its assigned probability.
Consequently, the final codebook layout is dependent on the session
seed 𝜉, thereby enhancing the security of the dynamic codebook.
(5) Repeated Sampling. The reordered word-probability pairs
are finally converted into contiguous intervals over [0, 𝑁). Each
word ˜𝑤𝑗is assigned an interval length 𝐿𝑗according to its reordered
probability ˜𝑝𝑗:
𝐿𝑗= ˜𝑝𝑗· 𝑁,
𝛼
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝐿𝑗= 𝑁.
(5)
Starting from 𝐵0 = 0, these intervals are placed consecutively, and
the boundary of the 𝑗-th interval is computed as
𝐵𝑗=
𝑗∑︁
𝑖=1
𝐿𝑖,
Ω𝑗= [𝐵𝑗−1, 𝐵𝑗).
(6)

Text Steganography with Dynamic Codebook and
Multimodal Large Language Model
ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
The final dynamic codebook is therefore defined as
C𝐷=

( ˜𝑤𝑗, Ω𝑗)
 𝛼
𝑗=1.
(7)
Encrypted Steganographic Mapping After constructing the
Dynamic Codebook C𝐷, we convert the secret message 𝑚into an
integer index
idx = Bin2Int(𝑚),
idx ∈[0, 𝑁).
We then locate the target interval Ω𝑗= [𝐵𝑗−1, 𝐵𝑗) that contains
this index and select the corresponding word ˜𝑤𝑗as the codeword.
At the same time, we compute the offset
𝑜= idx −𝐵𝑗−1,
0 ≤𝑜< 𝐿𝑗.
(8)
The codeword identifies the selected codebook interval, while the
offset specifies the exact position of the message within that inter-
val.
Directly transmitting the offset would expose the precise location
of the message inside the selected interval. To avoid this risk, the
offset is not sent through the Online Social Network (OSN). Instead,
we protect it with an XOR-based masking strategy. Specifically, we
XOR the binary form of the offset with the session seed 𝜉to obtain
a private key 𝑆:
𝑆= Int2Bin(𝑜) ⊕Int2Bin(𝜉),
(9)
where ⊕denotes the bitwise XOR operation. This private key 𝑆
is shared through a side channel. Without the session seed 𝜉, a
warden cannot correctly recover the offset even if 𝑆is intercepted.
3.2.1
Stego Caption Generation. After determining the code-
word, we use an MLLM to generate a stego caption 𝐶for the image
𝐼. For reliable extraction, the generated caption must satisfy three
conditions: it must contain the selected codeword 𝑤, it must con-
tain the anchor sequence AncSeq, and it must not contain any other
words from the semantic pool 𝑉sem. The caption generation with
a multimodal LLM does not always satisfy all of these constraints.
Similar to image generation, We also introduce a reject sampling
mechanism for caption generation, following the algorithm detailed
in the Supplementary Material. First, an embedding prompt guides
the multimodal LLM to generate a stego caption𝐶. If𝐶fails verifica-
tion, a caption feedback prompt asks the LLM to identify the errors
and produce an update prompt for revision. This loop continues
until the caption passes verification. The accepted stego caption is
then posted on the OSN.
3.3
Secret Message Extraction
Upon receiving the stego caption 𝐶, the receiver extracts the code-
word 𝑤and the anchor sequence AncSeq from the caption and
uses an MLLM to recover the seed words from the shared image 𝐼.
The recovered seed words are sorted according to their dictionary
frequencies to obtain the ordered seed word list Kord. Using Kord,
AncSeq, and the pre-shared key PSK, the receiver recomputes the
session parameters and the session seed 𝜉, and then reconstructs
the Dynamic Codebook C𝐷.
To recover the exact integer index of the secret message, the
receiver first restores the offset 𝑜by performing an XOR operation
between the private key 𝑆(received via the side channel) and the
binary form of the session seed 𝜉:
Int2Bin(𝑜) = 𝑆⊕Int2Bin(𝜉).
(10)
Next, the receiver locates the target interval Ω𝑗= [𝐵𝑗−1, 𝐵𝑗) cor-
responding to the codeword 𝑤in the codebook C𝐷. The index is
computed by adding the offset 𝑜to the base boundary 𝐵𝑗−1:
idx = 𝐵𝑗−1 + 𝑜.
(11)
Finally, the integer index idx is converted back to its binary repre-
sentation to recover the original secret message 𝑚.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
(1) Baselines. We compare the DyCo-Stega with one black-box
baseline, LLM-Stega [26], and six advanced white-box baselines:
AC [31], ADG [30], Discop [10], SparSamp [25], METEOR [14], and
iMEC [9].
(2) Models and Parameters. We use the gemini-3-pro-image-
preview API for image generation and the gpt-5.1-chat-latest API
for stego caption generation. We set (𝛼,𝑏, 𝜎) = (24, 28, 2.5) and
embed 𝜏=5 codewords in each stego caption. For the LLM-Stega,
we also use the gpt-5.1-chat-latest API to generate stego texts. Since
white-box methods require access to token probabilities, we im-
plement them on GPT-2 [22] and Qwen2.5 [28]. For DyCo-Stega
and LLM-Stega, we generate 15,000 stego texts. For each white-box
baseline, we select appropriate temperatures and set top-𝑝=0.99,
and generate 10,000 stego texts on each of the two language models,
resulting in a total of 6 × 2 × 10,000 stego texts.
4.2
Evaluation Metrics
(1) Text Quality. We use Perplexity (PPL) and Semantic Similarity
(SS) to evaluate the text quality of generated stego texts. PPL is
a widely used quantitative metric in text generation tasks. We
compute the PPL of different stego texts using GPT-2 [22] as the
reference language model:
PPL = exp
 
−1
𝐿
𝐿
∑︁
𝑡=1
log𝑝(𝑤𝑡|𝑤<𝑡)
!
,
(12)
where 𝐿is the length of the text,𝑤𝑡is the 𝑡-th token, and 𝑝(𝑤𝑡|𝑤<𝑡)
is the conditional probability assigned by the language model to
token 𝑤𝑡given the preceding context. Lower PPL indicates better
fluency.
For semantic similarity, we adopt Sentence-BERT [23] and use
the roberta-base-nli-mean-tokens [18] model to extract sentence
embeddings. We then compute the average cosine similarity be-
tween cover and stego texts. Higher SS indicates better semantic
preservation after secret message embedding.
(2) Embedding Capacity. Embedding Capacity (EC) is the average
number of secret bits embedded per word, which is measured in
bits per word (bpw). It is calculated as
EC = 𝐵
𝑊
(bpw),
(13)
where 𝐵is the number of embedded bits and𝑊is the total number
of words in the stego texts.
(3) Anti-Steganalysis Ability. Anti-steganalysis ability is impor-
tant for security. We use the test accuracy of a steganalysis classifier
based on Bert-FT [19]. For each method, we construct a balanced

ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Your Name et al.
cover–stego dataset and divide it into 60%/20%/20% for training,
validation, and testing. The steganalysis accuracy is defined as
Acc =
𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁
𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁+ 𝐹𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁,
(14)
where𝑇𝑃is true positives,𝑇𝑁is true negatives, 𝐹𝑃is false positives,
and 𝐹𝑁is false negatives. An accuracy closer to 0.5 indicates weaker
detectability and thus better concealment.
(4) Statistical Imperceptibility. The Kullback-Leibler Divergence
(KLD) is used to measure the statistical imperceptibility by compar-
ing the distribution of stego texts embeddings against that of cover
texts embeddings. We select the KLD metric proposed by Zhang et
al [30]. to evaluate statistical imperceptibility:
𝐾𝐿𝐷=
∑︁"
log
𝜎𝑦
𝜎𝑥

+ 𝜎2
𝑥+ (𝜇𝑥−𝜇𝑦)2
2𝜎2𝑦
−1
2
#
(15)
where 𝜇𝑥and 𝜎𝑥are the mean and standard deviation of cover texts,
while 𝜇𝑦and 𝜎𝑦represent those of stego texts.
(5) Image-Text Consistency. We use CLIP-Score [12], computed
with CLIP ViT-B/32 [21], to evaluate the semantic alignment be-
tween the image and the generated caption. Higher CLIP-Score
indicates better image-text consistency.
(6) Human Evaluation. For human evaluation, we invited 30
computer science undergraduates to assess the generated stego
texts. We randomly sampled and anonymized stego texts generated
by DyCo-Stega, LLM-Stega, and six white-box baselines before
annotation. Each annotator independently rated the captions on a 1–
5 scale across three dimensions: fluency, clarity, and grammaticality.
4.3
Main Results
(1) Main Results. Table 1 summarizes the main benchmark results
in text quality, embedding capacity, statistical imperceptibility, and
anti-steganalysis ability. Among all evaluated methods, DyCo-Stega
achieves the best overall performance, with a PPL of 128.9, an SS
of 0.8940, a KLD of 3.37, and an EC of 6.37 bpw. Compared with
LLM-Stega, our method obtains a lower PPL, higher SS, lower KLD,
higher EC, and an Acc value closer to 0.5, indicating a better balance
between text quality and embedding capacity. The improvement in
SS is mainly due to the introduction of the image as an additional
semantic constraint. Compared with the white-box baselines, DyCo-
Stega also outperforms the best reported values on PPL, SS, KLD,
and EC. In particular, although SparSamp on GPT-2 shows slightly
stronger anti-steganalysis ability, its text quality is still significantly
worse than that of the two black-box methods, as reflected by its
much higher PPL and lower semantic similarity.
(2) Image–Text Consistency. To evaluate whether secret message
embedding affects image–text consistency, we analyzed three in-
door scenes: office desk, kitchen counter, and bathroom vanity. For
each scene, we generated images along with their corresponding
cover and stego captions. We then computed the average CLIP-
Scores between the images and their cover captions, as well as
between the images and their stego captions. As shown in Table 2,
both types of captions achieve high CLIP-Scores, indicating strong
consistency with the image content. Furthermore, the difference in
scores between the cover and stego captions is minimal across all
Method
PPL↓
SS↑
KLD↓
EC↑
Acc
White-box (GPT-2)
AC
410.0
0.6980
164.20
3.89
0.5805
ADG
876.9
0.7070
45.11
5.33
0.4893
Discop
396.4
0.5500
11.42
3.80
0.4908
SparSamp
377.9
0.5540
10.87
3.91
0.5000
METEOR
298.3
0.5490
30.83
2.42
0.4910
iMEC
589.1
0.5740
76.71
3.07
0.4928
White-box (Qwen2.5)
AC
380.0
0.4360
51.43
4.16
0.7698
ADG
461.3
0.6480
29.87
4.86
0.5403
Discop
145.3
0.6910
10.45
3.63
0.5595
SparSamp
140.0
0.6950
10.41
3.77
0.5150
METEOR
243.1
0.6800
24.57
3.72
0.5188
iMEC
405.9
0.6560
36.22
3.46
0.5340
Black-box (GPT-5.1)
LLM-Stega
137.8
0.7230
5.81
5.27
0.5073
DyCo-Stega
128.9
0.8940
3.37
6.37
0.4997
Table 1: Main benchmark comparison across white-box and
black-box baselines. For Acc, values closer to 0.5 indicate
weaker detectability.
Scene
CLIP
(Cover)
CLIP
(Stego)
Δ
Office Desk
32.99
33.02
0.03
Kitchen Counter
30.00
30.16
0.16
Bathroom Vanity
32.23
32.22
−0.01
Average
31.74
31.80
+0.06
Table 2: CLIP-Score on three representative scenes.
scenes, with an average change of only 0.06. These results demon-
strate that secret message embedding has a negligible impact on
image–text consistency.
(3) Human Evaluation. The human evaluation results are shown
in Figure 2. Overall, the two black-box methods obtain substantially
higher scores than the white-box baselines on all three dimensions,
indicating that black-box text generation produces more natural and
readable stego texts. In particular, DyCo-Stega attains the highest
score on clarity, while maintaining fluency and grammaticality at a
level comparable to LLM-Stega. By contrast, white-box methods
achieve much lower overall scores. This is primarily because the
open-weight models they rely on are generally less capable than
state-of-the-art black-box models. Additionally, the secret message
embedding in these white-box methods more easily degrades the
naturalness of the generated text. In summary, DyCo-Stega can
preserve good text quality while embedding secret messages.
4.4
Ablation Studies
(1) Cross-Model Robustness. This experiment evaluates whether
the proposed method remains reliable across heterogeneous generator–
recognizer combinations, rather than depending on a specific model
pair. We use S@k to measure the fraction of trials that correctly
recover the seed words within 𝑘attempts, and AvgR to report the
average number of attempts over successful trials only. As shown

Text Steganography with Dynamic Codebook and
Multimodal Large Language Model
ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
(a) Cross-Model Robustness
Gen.
Rec.
S@1
S@3
AvgR
Gemini
Gemini
83%
98%
1.21
GPT
80%
97%
1.23
Grok
74%
96%
1.28
Claude
81%
97%
1.25
GPT
Gemini
76%
94%
1.31
GPT
72%
93%
1.36
Grok
74%
92%
1.33
Claude
78%
93%
1.31
Qwen
Gemini
60%
68%
1.24
GPT
55%
65%
1.27
Grok
52%
64%
1.28
Claude
59%
66%
1.25
(b) Probability Shaping Ablation
Setting
PPL ↓
KLD ↓
SS ↑
Half-Gaussian (𝜎=𝜏/4)
105.7
30.32
0.903
Half-Gaussian (𝜎=𝜏/2)★
128.9
3.37
0.894
Half-Gaussian (𝜎=𝜏)
167.9
13.40
0.836
Half-Gaussian (𝜎=2𝜏)
179.1
19.73
0.814
Half-Gaussian (𝜎=4𝜏)
182.4
38.21
0.854
Uniform
247.0
12.35
0.805
(c) OSN Robustness
Platform
S@1
S@2
S@3
WeChat
97%
100%
100%
Instagram
98%
99%
100%
Facebook
98%
100%
100%
X
97%
99%
100%
WeiBo
98%
99%
100%
(d) Prompt & Temperature
Temperature
Full
Mini
0
100%
40.7%
0.7
100%
48.7%
1.0
99.3%
39.3%
1.5
94.0%
34.7%
2.0
90.8%
30.2%
Table 3: Comprehensive ablation studies. (a) Cross-model robustness across generator–recognizer pairs, where Gen. = image
generator and Rec. = recognizer. (b) Probability shaping ablation (★= default). (c) Robustness to OSN compression. (d) Effect of
prompt design and temperature on recovery rate (S@3); Full = our designed prompt, Mini = minimally constrained prompt.
Figure 2: Human evaluation on fluency, clarity, and gram-
maticality
in Table 3(a), Gemini as the generator achieves consistently strong
performance, reaching 96%–98% S@3 across all recognizers, while
GPT also remains stable at 92%–94% S@3. In contrast, Qwen yields
a substantially lower S@3 of 64%–68%, although its AvgR on suc-
cessful cases remains comparable to the other generators. These
results indicate that the proposed method generalizes well across
recognizer families, but its reliability still depends on how clearly
the generator preserves the target visual semantic anchors.
(2) Probability Shaping Mechanism. This ablation examines how
the probability shaping parameter 𝜎affects the trade-off between
text quality and concealment in the dynamic codebook construc-
tion. As shown in Table 3(b), a sharper distribution with 𝜎=𝜏/4
gives the lowest PPL (105.7) and the highest SS (0.903), but also
leads to a much larger KLD (30.32), indicating a stronger devia-
tion from the cover text distribution. As 𝜎increases to 𝜏and 2𝜏,
SS decreases from 0.894 to 0.836 and 0.814, while KLD increases
from 3.37 to 13.40 and 19.73. The default setting 𝜎=𝜏/2 provides the
best overall balance, achieving relatively low PPL and KLD while
preserving high semantic similarity. Overall, the uniform setting is
clearly less favorable than the default half-Gaussian shaping, which
confirms that assigning larger probability to higher-ranked words
is important for text quality and statistical imperceptibility.
(3) OSN Robustness. This experiment evaluates whether transmis-
sion through online social networks affects seed words extraction.
We upload 500 images that have already been verified as success-
ful to major social platforms, take screenshots of the published
posts, and feed the screenshots to the recognizer for seed words
extraction.
As reported in Table 3(c), all five platforms achieve 100% success
under S@3. Under the stricter S@1 and S@2 criteria, S@1 ranges
from 97% to 98%, and S@2 ranges from 99% to 100%. These results
show that the proposed method remains highly robust after trans-
mission through online social networks. They also suggest that the
method depends mainly on visual semantic content, rather than
on fragile low-level image details that may be affected by platform
compression or screenshot capture. Since all test images were veri-
fied as successful before upload, the small gaps between S@1 and
S@3 are more likely to come from the uncertainty of black-box
models than from the transmission process itself.

ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Your Name et al.
Table 4: S@3 for recovering the seed words using different
video generators and recognizers.
Video Generator
Video Recognizer
Gemini
3.1 Flash
Gemini
3.1 Pro
GPT
5.3
GPT
5.4(Std)
GPT
5.4(Ext)
Veo
89%
95%
73%
82%
84%
Sora
82%
84%
70%
77%
78%
Seedance
83%
87%
68%
76%
80%
(4) Prompt Structure and Temperature Sensitivity. This study
evaluates whether the high recovery rate mainly comes from the
structured prompt design, and whether this advantage remains
stable under different temperatures. As shown in Table 3(d), the full
prompt is highly reliable across a broad temperature range: S@3
stays at 100% for 𝑇=0 and 𝑇=0.7, remains 99.3% at 𝑇=1.0, and is
still 90.8% at 𝑇=2.0. In contrast, the minimally constrained prompt
achieves only 40.7% at 𝑇=0, peaks at 48.7% at 𝑇=0.7, and drops to
30.2% at 𝑇=2.0. This large performance gap shows that recovery
reliability does not come from model capability alone, but criti-
cally depends on the structured prompt. Meanwhile, temperature
also has a clear effect on recovery performance, and relatively low
temperatures generally lead to more accurate recovery.
5
Extension to Video
Since our method relies on visual semantic anchors, it is natural
to explore if we can use the video generation and understanding
abilities of multimodal large language models to transmit videos
instead of images to build the dynamic codebook. However, current
video generation is less stable than image generation, and it costs
more time and money. Therefore, we only conduct a lightweight
exploration using the user interfaces of main models.
Experimental Setup. For video generation, we select three models:
Veo from Gemini, Sora from GPT, and Seedance from Doubao. We
take 100 images generated by Gemini from our previous experi-
ments and use them as base images to generate videos. For video
recognition, we select five models that can directly read videos:
Gemini 3.1 Flash, Gemini 3.1 Pro, GPT 5.3, GPT 5.4 Thinking in
Standard mode, and GPT 5.4 Thinking in Extended mode. We upload
the generated videos to these recognizers along with an extraction
prompt, and record the success rate within three attempts (S@3).
(1) Cross-Model Robustness. Table 4 reports the S@3 for recover-
ing the seed words using different video generators and recognizers.
Among the generators, videos produced by Veo paired with Gem-
ini 3.1 Pro achieve the highest success rate at 95%. Sora and Seedance
also maintains relatively stable performance. Overall, Gemini 3.1
Pro demonstrates the strongest robustness as a recognizer, while
the GPT series models show relatively lower success rates.
(2) Time Consumption. Table 5 reports the time consumption
for successful extractions. The choice of video generator heavily
influences the total time. Seedance requires significantly more time,
often pushing the extraction process above 500 seconds, whereas
Veo is the most efficient across all recognizers. Among the recog-
nizers, GPT 5.3 responds the fastest as an instant model without
an explicit thinking phase, but this speed is accompanied by lower
accuracy. Furthermore, although the GPT 5.4 Thinking variants
Table 5: Time consumption for successful recovery of the
seed words using different video generators and recognizers.
Video Generator
Video Recognizer
Gemini
3.1 Flash
Gemini
3.1 Pro
GPT
5.3
GPT
5.4(Std)
GPT
5.4(Ext)
Veo
139
173
133
207
212
Sora
205
261
197
294
298
Seedance
541
583
516
619
633
consume more time for their extended thinking process, this mode
does not significantly improve the extraction accuracy. This demon-
strates that the strong thinking ability of GPT does not offer as much
advantage for this task as the strong multimodal understanding of
Gemini.
(3) Discussion. Overall, these results support the feasibility of
extending the method from images to video. At the same time,
compared with the image setting, video currently brings higher cost
and lower stability. We therefore regard it as a promising extension,
while keeping the image setting as the main configuration.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented DyCo-Stega for black-box text steganog-
raphy with dynamic codebook and multimodal large language mod-
els. The core idea is to use public visual context to construct a
dynamic codebook for each communication session so that secret
extraction does not rely on fixed codebooks. Under this framework,
the secret message can be extracted by reconstructing the dynamic
codebook and recovering the offset with the transmitted private
key and the session seed. In addition, the optimization procedures
for image generation and caption generation improve the reliability
of seed word recovery and secret extraction in black box settings.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the pro-
posed method. DyCo-Stega achieves strong overall performance in
text quality, embedding capacity, statistical imperceptibility, and
anti-steganalysis ability. The results also show that the method
preserves image and text consistency, remains robust across dif-
ferent generators and recognizers, and maintains high recovery
performance after transmission through online social networks. We
further provide a preliminary study on video carriers, which sug-
gests that the proposed framework can be extended beyond images.
In future work, we will investigate the feasibility of applying the
proposed framework to other modalities, such as audio, and further
study the use of multimodal large language models for more stable
steganography.

Text Steganography with Dynamic Codebook and
Multimodal Large Language Model
ACM Multimedia 2026, November 10–14, 2026, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil