Polynomial Multiproofs
for Scalable Data Availability Sampling
in Blockchain Light Clients
Rachit Anand Srivastava*, Vikram Bhattacharjee*, Will Arnold, Toufeeq Pasha
Avail
Abstract
Light clients are essential for scalable blockchain systems because they verify data avail-
ability without downloading full blocks. In data-availability-sampling-based systems,
sampled cells are retrieved from a peer-to-peer network and verified against cryptographic
commitments. A common deployment pattern associates each sampled cell with an
independent Kate–Zaverucha–Goldberg (KZG) proof, creating substantial cumulative
bandwidth, storage, and verification overhead. This paper studies polynomial multiproofs
(PMP) as a mechanism for reducing these costs in blockchain light clients. We present a
design in which multiple sampled cell evaluations are verified using a single aggregated
proof over a shared evaluation micro-domain and describe the corresponding changes to
proof generation, dissemination, retrieval, and verification in a peer-to-peer light-client
stack. We instantiate and evaluate the design in Avail, a modular data availability layer
for blockchains, as a case study. The results show lower proof bytes, lower verifier CPU
and memory usage, and deployment-level infrastructure cost reductions of up to 45%
relative to a per-cell baseline, while also clarifying the trade-offs introduced by grouped
retrieval.
1
Introduction
Blockchain systems face a basic scalability problem: strong verification usually requires
every node to download and validate full blocks, which imposes substantial communication,
storage, and computation costs [1, 2]. These costs are especially restrictive for light clients
running on mobile devices, browsers, and edge environments [4]. For light clients to be
practical at scale, data availability verification must remain both sound and efficient.
A common approach is Data Availability Sampling (DAS), in which block data is erasure
coded into cells and clients sample a subset of coordinates to obtain probabilistic assurance
that the full data is available [3, 1]. Many modern deployments authenticate sampled cells
using Kate–Zaverucha–Goldberg (KZG) polynomial commitments [5, 3]. In a baseline
design, however, each sampled cell carries an independent proof, so the cumulative cost of
proof transmission, storage, and verification grows quickly with the number of samples.
These costs are amplified in peer-to-peer settings, where cells and proofs are retrieved
through a distributed hash table (DHT) [7, 4]. We address this bottleneck by studying
polynomial multiproofs (PMP) as a mechanism for reducing proof overhead in blockchain
light clients [6]. Instead of verifying each sampled cell with a separate KZG proof, a light
client verifies multiple sampled cells with one aggregated proof, while the peer-to-peer
layer stores grouped proof-carrying objects rather than per-cell objects. We instantiate
this design in Avail as a case study.
*Both authors contributed equally to this work.
1
arXiv:2604.16559v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

A key requirement is that aggregation must not weaken DAS security. In our design,
grouping changes only the transport unit exposed by the DHT. The light client still reasons
about sampled coordinates individually. To make this precise, we bind each aggregated
proof to a fixed micro-domain of evaluations and to canonical grouping metadata, so the
verifier knows exactly which opened values belong to each proof.
The main contributions of this paper are:
• identifying per-cell KZG proofs as a bottleneck for DAS light clients in peer-to-peer
settings and designing a multiproof retrieval and verification model for grouped sampled
cells;
• specifying the implementation path from full-node proof generation to fat-client DHT
publication and light-client verification; and
• implementing and evaluating the design in Avail, showing lower verifier overhead and
up to 45% lower infrastructure cost.
2
Related Work
Data availability has emerged as a central problem in scalable blockchain verification.
Al-Bassam et al. [1] introduced fraud and data availability proofs for strengthening light-
client security, and LazyLedger later proposed an architecture centered on ordering and
data availability rather than global execution [2]. Hall-Andersen et al. [3] formalized DAS
and analyzed its security in relation to erasure coding and commitment schemes. At the
networking layer, Król et al. [4] studied the peer-to-peer requirements of Ethereum-style
DAS.
Polynomial commitments provide the cryptographic basis for many DAS constructions.
Kate, Zaverucha, and Goldberg introduced constant-size commitments with succinct
evaluation proofs [5]. Boneh et al. [6] showed how multiple polynomial evaluations can be
aggregated into a single proof. Our work differs from this prior literature by studying
how such multiproofs can be integrated into a peer-to-peer light-client workflow, where
proof dissemination, retrieval granularity, and verifier cost all matter at the systems level.
A relevant engineering reference point is Ethereum’s EIP-4844 and the broader proto-
danksharding effort, which deploy KZG commitments and batch verification in a large-scale
production setting. That work focuses on validator-side blob verification, whereas we focus
on peer-to-peer dissemination and reuse of proof-carrying objects for DAS light clients. In
particular, validator-side systems often batch independent openings using pairing-product
checks, which is an important comparison point for our evaluation.
Recent work on DAS networking has explored stronger dissemination and robustness
models than a conventional DHT. PANDAS [8] redesigns dissemination around direct,
lightweight exchanges to meet consensus-time constraints, while Robust Distributed Arrays
pursue stronger end-to-end robustness guarantees. Related measurement work on large
peer-to-peer content-routing systems also helps contextualize the assumptions behind
DHT-based lookup performance. For example, recent studies of IPFS report meaningful
centralization and heterogeneity in peer quality, which can materially affect routing
reliability, latency, and lookup behavior in practice [9]. Our work is complementary:
rather than redesigning the dissemination substrate, we optimize the cryptographic and
storage paths within a DHT-oriented light-client architecture.
2

3
Polynomial Multiproof Construction
A polynomial commitment scheme (PCS) is defined as a tuple of algorithms or protocols
S = (gen, com, open).
Here gen outputs a structured reference string (SRS), com commits to a polynomial, and
open proves correct evaluation on designated sets.
3.1
Generic Multiproof Form
The construction used in our case study follows the first scheme of Boneh et al. [6], which
is designed to optimize opening efficiency. To avoid notation overload, we use Ui ⊆T for
the opened subset associated with polynomial fi, where T = {z1, . . . , zt} is a common
ambient evaluation domain.
The prover computes
h(X) :=
X
i∈[k]
γi−1 · fi(X) −ri(X)
ZUi(X)
,
(1)
where ri is the interpolation polynomial matching the opened values on Ui and γ is the
verifier challenge. The verifier checks one aggregated pairing equation rather than one
equation per opening.
3.2
Shared-Point Specialization Used Here
To obtain a design suitable for grouped DAS retrieval, we use the shared-point specialization
Ui = Tg
∀i ∈[k],
(2)
where Tg is a fixed micro-domain of size g inside one row- or column-commitment context.
Each opened polynomial still satisfies the same degree bound d, but all openings appearing
in one aggregated proof are over the same micro-domain Tg.
Under this specialization,
h(X) =
P
i γi−1 (fi(X) −ri(X))
ZTg(X)
.
(3)
The prover therefore computes the weighted polynomial sum, divides by ZTg, and discards
the remainder. This avoids interpolation during proof generation.
The verifier computes
Zi := [ZTg\Ui(x)]2 = [1]2 = g2,
(4)
because Ui = Tg for every opened polynomial, and then reduces the check to a single
aggregated pairing relation:
F :=
Y
i
e

γi−1 · (ci −[ri(x)]1), Zi

= e
 X
i
γi−1ci −
"X
i
γi−1ri(x)
#
1
, g2
!
.
(5)
Table 1 summarizes the opening and verification cost under the shared-point specialization.
These counts apply to the specialized construction above, not to generic batch verification
of independent single-point KZG openings.
3

Operation
Open
Verify
Polynomial interpolation
0
1
G1 scalar multiplication
d + 1 −|Tg|
N + |Tg| + 1
G2 scalar multiplication
0
d (cacheable)
Pairing
0
2
Table 1: Operation summary for the shared-point specialization.
3.3
Mapping to DAS Grouping
The main source of ambiguity in practice is the relationship between the transport group
and the point set used by the verifier. In our instantiation, these are the same object:
each grouped retrieval object corresponds to a full micro-domain
Tg = {zj1, . . . , zjg}
inside a single row or column context.
The grouped object therefore transports all
evaluations in that micro-domain for each included commitment context, rather than only
an arbitrary subset of them. This is what makes the specialization in Equation 2 correct.
Concretely, let a row polynomial fr be evaluated over a full row domain Trow. The
implementation partitions Trow into disjoint micro-domains of size g. For one such block
Tg = {zj1, . . . , zjg} ⊂Trow,
the grouped object stores the entire value vector

fr(zj1), . . . , fr(zjg)

together with the commitment identifier and block metadata. If several rows are grouped
together under one proof, each row contributes its full evaluation vector on the same
micro-domain Tg.
Worked example. Suppose a row commitment context uses row domain
Trow = {z1, . . . , z8},
and the implementation chooses micro-domain size g = 4. One grouped object may
correspond to
Tg = {z1, z2, z3, z4}.
If two adjacent rows are packed together, then the object transports
(fr(z1), fr(z2), fr(z3), fr(z4))
and
(fr+1(z1), fr+1(z2), fr+1(z3), fr+1(z4)).
A light client may have sampled only one or two coordinates inside this group, but
verification is performed against the full transported micro-domain Tg. This removes the
earlier ambiguity between the sampled subset and the verifier’s opened set.
4

3.4
Non-Interactive Challenge Derivation
Because aggregated proofs are stored in the DHT and reused by multiple clients, we
instantiate the verifier challenge γ using Fiat–Shamir:
γ = H(domain ∥srs_id ∥cm1 ∥· · · ∥cmk ∥Tg ∥coords ∥GCellBlock).
(6)
The transcript binds the challenge to the commitment context, the exact micro-domain,
the grouping metadata, and the SRS domain.
This prevents replay across different
grouping layouts or heterogeneous commitment contexts, assuming collision resistance of
the hash function and a common SRS for all commitments appearing in the proof.
4
Instantiation in Avail
We instantiate the design in Avail. Row and column commitments, together with the
corresponding proof material, are generated by Avail full nodes. The implementation path
is as follows.
1. A full node computes the encoded block, row and column commitments, and the
evaluation values required for each configured micro-domain.
2. For each micro-domain, the full node constructs the aggregated proof input: commit-
ment identifiers, full evaluation vectors over Tg, and block-position metadata.
3. A fat client fetches authenticated headers and proof-carrying objects from one or more
full nodes, packages them into grouped retrieval objects, and republishes them into
the DHT.
4. A light client samples coordinates, maps each sampled coordinate to its containing
micro-domain, fetches the corresponding grouped object from the DHT, authenticates
the commitment root from the header, and verifies the grouped proof.
In the baseline design, each sampled data entry is stored together with an independent
proof in the DHT, which duplicates proof metadata at fine granularity and increases the
number of DHT objects. We therefore redesign the DHT layout so that a single proof
authenticates multiple scalars grouped into a larger retrieval unit.
4.1
Grouped Object Types
The grouped retrieval path in Avail is represented by two core structures: GCellBlock,
which identifies the covered region of the encoded block, and MCell, which packages the
transported scalar values together with one aggregated proof.
struct GCellBlock {
rows_start:
u32,
rows_end:
u32,
cols_start:
u32,
cols_end:
u32,
}
struct MCell {
proof:
[u8; 48],
block:
GCellBlock,
count:
u32,
scalars:
Vec<[u64; 4]>,
}
Figure 1: Core grouped retrieval structures used in the multiproof path.
Figure 1 shows the logical structure of the grouped retrieval object used by the multiproof
5

path. GCellBlock binds the proof to a canonical block region, while MCell carries the
proof, the covered region, and the transported scalar values.
4.2
Threat Model and Grouping Trade-Offs
Grouping preserves the DAS acceptance rule but brings additional network-level considera-
tions. Grouped requests may expose interest in nearby coordinates, reducing unlinkability
compared with per-coordinate retrieval. Likewise, withholding at the level of grouped
objects can increase correlation among retrieval failures. These are trade-offs of the
grouped retrieval design within the DHT-based model considered here.
The Fiat–Shamir transcript is bound to the SRS identifier, ordered commitment list,
micro-domain Tg, coordinates, and GCellBlock metadata. Under canonical serialization,
this binding helps prevent a proof constructed for one grouped object from being reused
under a different grouping, ordering, or commitment context without changing the derived
challenge.
Conservative soundness accounting. If a deployment originally budgets s independent
sampled coordinates under a per-cell retrieval model, then under worst-case perfect
correlation inside groups of size g, a conservative lower bound on the number of effectively
independent events is approximately ⌊s/g⌋. To preserve the same target soundness level
under this pessimistic model, one should therefore budget roughly g times as many
coordinate samples or, equivalently, ensure that at least the original target number of
distinct groups is sampled. This is intentionally conservative, but it makes the grouping-
versus-soundness trade-off explicit.
Privacy trade-off. The same grouping factor g also controls privacy leakage. Larger
groups improve proof amortization and locality but reveal a larger neighborhood of queried
coordinates to a serving peer. Smaller groups preserve more of the unlinkability of per-cell
retrieval. In practice, g should be chosen jointly with the sampling budget and the
expected threat model.
4.3
Encoding and Retrieval Model
We use the following visual encoding:
• Grid entry (32-byte data): •
• Commitment: •
• Cell retrieved through the DHT: □
• Proof for that cell: •
Figure 2: Baseline and multiproof layouts in the Avail instantiation.
Figure 2 illustrates the difference between the baseline per-cell layout and the grouped
multiproof layout used in the Avail instantiation.
6

4.4
Baseline and Multiproof Layouts
In the baseline layout, every 32-byte data entry is stored with its own 48-byte proof.
Proof [u8;48]
Data [u8;32]
Table 2: Baseline layout.
In the multiproof layout, several scalars are grouped into one authenticated object
represented by an MCell, which stores a vector of scalars, one aggregated proof, and a
GCellBlock describing the covered block region.
Proof
GCellBlock
Count
Scalars
[u8;48]
4 × u32
u32
N × [u64; 4]
Table 3: Multiproof layout.
Tables 2 and 3 show the difference between the baseline per-entry object and the grouped
authenticated object used by the multiproof path.
4.5
Storage Analysis
In the baseline design, each DHT object occupies
32 + 48 = 80 bytes.
For 64 entries, the total is
64 × 80 = 5,120 bytes.
If 4 entries are grouped into one authenticated cell, each cell contains
4 × 32 = 128 bytes
plus one 48-byte proof, for a total of
128 + 48 = 176 bytes per cell.
The amortized cost is therefore
128 + 48
4
= 44 bytes per entry,
and 64 entries require
16 × 176 = 2,816 bytes.
These calculations isolate proof amortization and do not include deployment metadata
such as GCellBlock, scalar counts, serialization framing, DHT keys, routing metadata,
replication overhead, or transport framing. They should therefore be interpreted as
lower-bound proof amortization figures rather than full end-to-end on-wire storage or
bandwidth costs.
5
Implementation in Avail
We implemented the design in Avail’s Rust-based light-client stack, using the open-source
Avail light client repository as the baseline [10]. The multiproof integration described in
this paper was merged through pull request #778 at commit 4b17189 [11]. Full nodes
generate proofs and commitment context for DAS serving. Fat clients fetch these objects,
convert them into grouped authenticated MCell objects keyed by GCellBlock, and publish
them into the DHT. Light clients sample coordinates, fetch grouped objects, reconstruct
the evaluation context, and verify multiple sampled cells against one proof. If a grouped
object fails verification or cannot be retrieved within the configured timeout, the light
client treats that attempt as a failed lookup and retries with another peer.
7

6
Experimental Results
We evaluate the proposed multiproof integration along four dimensions: verifier resource
consumption, network behavior, service capacity, and sensitivity to system parameters.
6.1
Experimental Setup
Hardware and software. Experiments were conducted on AWS c6a.{2xlarge, 4xlarge}
instances for fat clients and m6a.large instances for light clients. All nodes used Rust
1.85, blst for pairing operations, and tokio for asynchronous execution. The DHT
implementation is Kademlia over TCP with α = 3, bucket size k = 20, concurrency
window 16, and replication factor 5.
Environment model. The reported results were obtained under a benign-cloud deploy-
ment model rather than an adversarial routing model. DHT hit rate denotes successful
retrieval within the experiment timeout window under this deployment. Accordingly,
a reported hit rate of 100% means that all measured lookups in that workload and
time window succeeded; it is not a universal guarantee about all future deployments or
adversarial conditions.
Datasets and workloads. We generated Reed–Solomon-encoded blocks from 1 KB
to 2 MB and evaluated four configurations: Vanilla, which serves each sampled cell
with an independent proof; Batched Single Proofs, which batch-verifies independent
KZG openings using pairing-product checks; Grouped Only, which uses grouped DHT
objects without multiproof aggregation; and PMP, which serves grouped objects using
aggregated multiproofs. Unless varied explicitly, the PMP configuration used |Tg| = 16.
Each experiment ran for 30 minutes and was repeated five times with different random
seeds. Reported values are means with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals.
Metrics. We report verifier CPU cost, peak memory usage, DHT hit rates, DHT put
rates, and the deployment size needed to keep 95th percentile lookup latency below 250 ms.
CPU is reported in normalized relative units with the single-proof baseline fixed at 100
on the same hardware. Per-fat capacity denotes the maximum sustained payload served
per fat client while meeting the latency target.
6.2
Evaluation Scope and Ablation
Table 4 separates three sources of improvement: verifier-side batching of independent
proofs, DHT-side grouping of retrieval objects, and full multiproof aggregation. Batched
verification closes part of the verifier-cost gap relative to the naive per-proof baseline, but
it does not reduce proof bytes or DHT object count. Grouped retrieval improves locality
and storage fragmentation. The best end-to-end gains appear when proof aggregation
and grouped transport are combined.
Metric
Vanilla
Batched Grouped Grouped + PMP
Verifier CPU @1,000 batch
110
82
92
60
Peak memory (GB)
1.2
1.05
1.0
0.7
DHT hit rate @1 KB
78%
78%
88%
100%
DHT hit rate @1.5–2 MB
12%
12%
48%
98%
Fats to meet SLO (1 KB)
40
36
18
10
Per-fat capacity (B/fat @2 MB)
16
19
46
80
Table 4:
Ablation across independent-proof batching, grouped retrieval, and polynomial
multiproofs.
8

6.3
Verifier Cost
Figure 3 shows that PMP lowers verifier CPU cost across batch sizes. At a batch size of
1,000 verifications, PMP uses about 60 normalized CPU units compared with about 110
for the single-proof baseline. Batched independent proofs reduce this to about 82 units,
which narrows but does not eliminate the advantage of PMP. The same trend appears in
memory usage in Figure 4.
Figure 3: CPU usage by batch size.
Figure 4: Peak memory usage across the baseline and ablation configurations.
6.4
Network Behavior
Figure 5 shows that PMP sustains higher DHT put rates as payload size increases. Figure 6
shows that DHT hit rates improve much more substantially once grouped retrieval and
multiproofs are introduced. At 1 KB payload size, hit rate rises from 78% in the vanilla
design to 88% with grouped retrieval alone and 100% with PMP. At 1.5–2 MB payload
sizes, the hit rate rises from 12% to 48% with grouping and to 98% with PMP. Ordinary
batched verification does not materially improve DHT hit or put behavior, because it
changes only verifier arithmetic and not the number or layout of transported objects.
9

Figure 5: DHT put rates by payload size for the baseline and PMP configurations.
Figure 6: DHT hit rates by payload size for Vanilla, Grouped Only, and Multiproofs.
6.5
Capacity and Sensitivity
Figure 7 shows the improvement in per-fat payload capacity at 2 MB block size. Figure 8
shows the reduction in serving fat clients across configurations, and Figure 9 shows the
corresponding reduction in server requirements. For the 1 KB payload scenario, the
number of serving fat clients required to satisfy the latency objective drops from 40 in
the vanilla system to 36 with batched single proofs, 18 with grouped retrieval alone, and
10 with PMP. At larger payloads, per-fat capacity improves from 16 to 19 B/fat under
batched independent verification, to 46 B/fat under grouped retrieval, and to 80 B/fat
with PMP.
Figure 7: Per-fat payload capacity versus fat count at 2 MB block size.
10

Figure 8: Serving fats required across configurations.
Figure 9: Servers required across the baseline and PMP configurations.
Varying |Tg| ∈{8, 16, 32} shows a convex trade-off between proving efficiency and verifier
interpolation cost, with |Tg| = 16 giving the best end-to-end latency. Under 10%–30%
DHT churn, PMP maintains hit rates above 75% at 2 MB payload size, while the baseline
falls below 20%.
6.6
Infrastructure Cost Model
We define infrastructure cost as the cloud compute cost of the minimum deployment
required to satisfy the target lookup latency objective. In the experiments, this corresponds
to the number and type of fat client instances needed to keep the 95th percentile lookup
latency below the target threshold.
Metric
Vanilla
PMP
Relative
Verifier CPU @1,000 batch
110
60
↓45%
Peak memory (GB)
1.2
0.7
↓42%
DHT hit rate @1 KB
78%
100%
↑1.28×
DHT hit rate @1.5–2 MB
12%
98%
↑8.17×
Fats to meet SLO (1 KB)
40
10
↓75%
Per-fat capacity (B/fat @2 MB)
16
80
↑5×
Infra compute cost
—
—
↓≤45%
Table 5: Results summary comparing the baseline design with the PMP deployment.
Table 5 consolidates the main end-to-end gains of PMP relative to the baseline design.
It should be read together with Table 4, which shows that part of the gain comes from
grouped transport and part from proof aggregation itself.
11

6.7
Reproducibility
All experiments fix compiler versions, random seeds, and network parameters. Metrics
are exported through Prometheus, and confidence intervals are computed using bootstrap
resampling. CPU usage is reported as normalized utilization relative to the baseline
single-proof configuration on the same hardware. Because CPU and memory are reported
in normalized units on fixed hardware, the results support relative comparison across
configurations but do not by themselves establish feasibility on mobile- or browser-class
devices.
7
Conclusion
This paper studied polynomial multiproofs as a systems optimization for blockchain
light clients and validated the design through an implementation and evaluation in
Avail. By aggregating multiple sampled evaluations into a single proof and embedding
that representation directly into the DHT workflow, the proposed design reduces proof
redundancy, improves locality, and lowers verifier overhead.
The results show lower CPU and memory consumption, higher hit rates under large
payloads, and lower infrastructure requirements, while also making explicit the trade-off
introduced by grouped retrieval under adversarial or privacy-sensitive conditions. The
design is complementary to stronger dissemination substrates such as PANDAS: our
contribution targets proof amortization and retrieval locality within the authenticated
data path.
Nomenclature
• DAS: Data Availability Sampling
• DHT: Distributed Hash Table
• KZG: Kate–Zaverucha–Goldberg polynomial commitment
• PCS: Polynomial Commitment Scheme
• PMP: Polynomial Multiproof
• SRS: Structured Reference String
• F: finite field
• G1, G2: pairing groups
• e(·, ·): bilinear pairing
• Tg: shared evaluation micro-domain
• ZTg: vanishing polynomial over Tg