Stringology Based Cryptology
Victor Kebande∗†
∗University of Colorado Denver, CO USA
†ATLAS Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Colorado, USA
Email: victor.kebande@ucdenver.edu, victor.kebande@colorado.edu
Abstract—The modern cryptographic primitives are known
to generate large volumes of sequential data like keystreams,
ciphertext blocks, and hash outputs. Traditional cryptgraphic
evaluation methods rely primarily on statistical randomness tests
and algebraic cryptanalysis techniques. This paper introduces
the concept of Stringology-Based Cryptology (SBC), which applies
classical string processing and pattern matching techniques to
analyze structural properties of cryptographic outputs. By inter-
preting cryptographic outputs as symbolic sequences, stringology
algorithms can be used to detect pattern recurrence, substring
distributions, and structural correlations. In addition, the paper
demonstrate how pattern frequency analysis and substring re-
currence metrics can be applied to evaluate keystream outputs
generated by stream ciphers. Experimental results illustrate that
SBC analysis provides complementary insights into structural
characteristics of cryptographic sequences and may support
future research in structural cryptanalysis and cryptographic
evaluation.
Index Terms—Stringology, Cryptology, Cryptanalysis, Cipher,
pattern, SBC.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cryptographic mechanisms are essential for protecting mod-
ern digital communication infrastructures, including network
protocols, cloud computing services [1]. It has been observed
that many cryptographic primitives generate sequential outputs
like the keystreams, ciphertext blocks, and hash values. One
central requirement for the security of these primitives is
that the produced sequences behave indistinguishably from
uniformly random data. This, prevents adversaries from infer-
ring structural information about the underlying cryptographic
process.
The evaluation of such sequences traditionally relies on
statistical randomness testing frameworks. Standard test suites
such as the NIST Statistical Test Suite (STS), TestU01, and
PractRand analyze statistical properties, frequency distribu-
tions, runs, entropy, and correlation metrics [2, 3]. These tools
provide valuable evidence regarding the overall randomness
quality of generated sequences. However, these approaches
primarily focus on global statistical characteristics and may
not fully capture localized structural relationships that arise
from deterministic internal operations within cryptographic
algorithms.
An alternative analytical perspective can be obtained by
examining cryptographic outputs as symbolic sequences and
analyzing them using pattern-based techniques. Stringology,
This paper has been accepted for publication in ”The 2nd International Con-
ference on Sustainability, Innovation, and Society (ICSIS 2026)”, Valencia,
Spain
which is the study of algorithms for processing and analyzing
strings, provides a rich collection of methods for detecting
structural patterns within large sequential datasets. Classical
algorithms such as Knuth–Morris–Pratt (KMP) and Boyer–
Moore enable efficient identification of recurring patterns, sub-
string frequencies, and structural correlations within symbolic
sequences [4, 5].
By modeling cryptographic outputs as strings, stringol-
ogy techniques can be applied to investigate structural char-
acteristics embedded within keystreams and ciphertext se-
quences. This perspective allows cryptographic sequences to
be analyzed not only through aggregate statistical properties
but also through localized pattern structures. Such analysis
may provide additional insight into the internal behavior of
cryptographic primitives and complement existing statistical
evaluation methodologies.
The objective of this paper is to introduce the concept of
Stringology-Based Cryptology (SBC), a framework that applies
string processing techniques to analyze structural properties of
cryptographic outputs. The proposed approach demonstrates
how substring frequency distributions and recurrence patterns
can be used to evaluate structural characteristics of keystream
sequences generated by stream ciphers.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II presents background on stringology, pattern analysis and
cryptographic sequences. Section III introduces the related
work while Section IV discuss the threat model, followed
by a Stringology-Based Cryptology Framework in Section V.
Experimental Evaluation are discussed in Section VI with
results in Section VII. A discussion ensures in Section VII
and after this the paper concludes in Section VIII.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Cryptographic Sequences
Many cryptographic algorithms produce sequences of bits
that must appear indistinguishable from random data [6]. A
stream, for example, can be modeled as a keystream generator
as is shown in Eq 1:
G(K, N) →S
(1)
where K denotes the secret key, N represents a nonce
or initialization vector, and S = s1s2...sn represents the
generated keystream sequence. For a secure stream cipher, the
distribution of S should be indistinguishable based on Chosen
Plaintext Attacks (IND-CPA) [7] from the uniform distribution
Un over {0, 1}n.
arXiv:2604.16669v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

Fig. 1.
Threat model for the Stringology-Based Cryptology. A challenge oracle outputs a sequence S drawn either from a cryptographic
generator G(K, N) or from a uniform random distribution. The adversary A analyzes structural properties of S using the SBC pipeline to
distinguish its origin.
B. Stringology and Pattern Analysis
Stringology studies algorithms and data structures for an-
alyzing strings [5, 8]. Pattern detection algorithms such as
KMP and Boyer–Moore are widely used to identify repeated
substrings and structural patterns within sequences [4, 5].
Given a pattern P of length m and a sequence S, the
frequency of pattern occurrences can be defined as
f(P, S) = |{i | Si:i+m−1 = P}|
(2)
For a random sequence, the expected probability of ob-
serving a specific pattern of length m is approximately 2−m.
Deviations from this expectation may indicate structural cor-
relations within the sequence.
III. RELATED WORK
Existing research on cryptographic evaluation has tradi-
tionally relied on statistical randomness testing and algebraic
cryptanalysis. Standard statistical evaluation frameworks such
as the NIST Statistical Test Suite (STS) [2], TestU01, and
PractRand are widely used to assess the pseudorandom prop-
erties of cryptographic sequences produced by stream ciphers,
pseudorandom number generators, and hash functions [3, 9].
These methods are used to analyze global statistical properties
such as frequency distributions, runs, and entropy in order to
determine whether a generated sequence deviates from ideal
random behavior [10].
Although statistical tests provide good insights into the
overall randomness of cryptographic outputs, they primarily
evaluate aggregate statistical characteristics and may not cap-
ture localized structural patterns that arise from internal cipher
transformations.
Nevertheless, recent research has therefore explored alter-
native approaches for detecting structural properties in cryp-
tographic outputs. Structural cryptanalysis techniques analyze
correlations introduced by deterministic operations within
cryptographic algorithms. In particular, modern stream cipher
constructions frequently rely on Add–Rotate–XOR (ARX)
operations to achieve diffusion and nonlinearity [10–12]. The
sstream ciphers such as ChaCha20 employ repeated modular
addition, bit rotation, and XOR transformations to mix internal
state values [13]. While these operations are computationally
efficient and resistant to certain classical cryptanalytic tech-
niques, they may introduce subtle structural characteristics
in the generated keystream outputs. Consequently, analyzing
these structural properties can provide useful insights into the
internal behavior of such algorithms. Other studies include
stringology based cryptanalysis of Echacha20 stream cipher
based on KMP and BM algorithms [14].
In view of the foregoing, the field of stringology has devel-
oped a wide range of algorithms for analyzing large sequential
datasets [15]. Stringology focuses on efficient pattern detec-
tion, substring matching, and structural analysis of symbolic
sequences. Classical algorithms such as Knuth–Morris–Pratt
(KMP) and Boyer–Moore (BM) enable efficient detection of
repeated patterns and substring recurrences in large strings
[4, 5]. These techniques have been widely applied in domains
such as text processing, bioinformatics, and data mining,
where identifying recurring patterns and structural similarities

is essential for sequence analysis.
Despite the success of stringology methods in other do-
mains, their application to cryptographic sequence analysis
remains relatively limited. Cryptographic outputs such as
keystreams and ciphertext blocks naturally form long symbolic
sequences making them suitable candidates for pattern-based
analysis. However, most cryptographic evaluation frameworks
continue to rely primarily on statistical tests rather than
structural pattern detection techniques.
This work bridges these domains by introducing the con-
cept of stringology-based cryptology, (SBC), which applies
classical string processing and pattern detection algorithms
to analyze cryptographic outputs. By modeling cryptographic
sequences as symbolic strings and extracting pattern-based
statistics, the proposed framework provides a complementary
analytical perspective for evaluating structural characteristics
of cryptographic primitives.
IV. THREAT MODEL
Our threat model considers a probabilistic polynomial-time
adversary A operating in a distinguishing setting, as illustrated
in Figure 1. A cryptographic generator produces a sequence
Sc = G(K, N) using a secret key K and nonce N, while
a truly random sequence Sr is sampled from the uniform
distribution over {0, 1}n. A challenge oracle selects a bit
b ∈{0, 1} and returns a sequence S, where S = Sc if b = 0
and S = Sr otherwise. The adversary is given access only to
the observed sequence S and must determine its origin.
The adversary leverages the proposed Stringology-Based
Cryptographic approach by interpreting S as a symbolic
sequence and extracting structural features through ϕ(S),
pattern statistics f(P, S), and higher-level metrics such as
entropy, deviation, and recurrence. Based on these structural
characteristics, the adversary outputs a decision A(S) ∈{0, 1}
indicating whether the sequence is classified as cryptographic
or random. The distinguishing capability of the adversary is
measured by the advantage as is shown in Eq 3.
AdvA = |Pr[A(Sc) = 1] −Pr[A(Sr) = 1]|
(3)
The adversary is assumed to have full access to the observed
sequence and the ability to compute structural statistics and
apply statistical or learning-based analysis, but has no knowl-
edge of the secret key, internal state, or direct control over the
generator. The security objective is that cryptographic outputs
remain indistinguishable from random sequences, meaning
that any efficient adversary should achieve only negligible
advantage, even when exploiting structural patterns identified
through the SBC framework.
V. STRINGOLOGY-BASED CRYPTOLOGY FRAMEWORK
This work proposes a Stringology-Based Cryptology (SBC)
framework that interprets cryptographic outputs as symbolic
sequences and applies string pattern analysis in order to
identify structural characteristics embedded within these se-
quences that is shown in Figure 2. Traditional cryptographic
evaluation methods primarily rely on statistical randomness
tests that measure global properties such as entropy, frequency
distributions, and run lengths.
Fig. 2. Stringology-Based Cryptology analysis pipeline.
While these tests provide important insights into the overall
randomness of generated sequences, they do not necessarily
capture localized structural relationships that may arise from
deterministic internal transformations within cryptographic
algorithms. The proposed framework therefore adopts a com-
plementary perspective in which cryptographic outputs are
modeled as symbolic strings that can be analyzed using
classical stringology techniques.
Figure 2 shows the general pipeline of the proposed
SBCframework. The analysis begins by showing cryptographic
outputs like the keystreams or ciphertext blocks as binary
sequences S ∈{0, 1}n. These sequences are then processed
through a feature extraction stage that computes structural
statistics based on substring patterns observed within the
sequence. Formally, we let
Formally, let
Φ : {0, 1}n →Rd
(4)
denote a feature extraction mapping that transforms a bi-
nary sequence S into a vector of structural statistics. The
mapping Φ(·) computes pattern-based characteristics including
substring frequency distributions, recurrence statistics, and po-
sitional density measures that describe how frequently specific
bit patterns appear throughout the sequence.
For a given pattern P of length m, the number of occur-
rences of this pattern within a sequence S can be defined as

f(P, S) = |{i | Si:i+m−1 = P}|
(5)
where Si:i+m−1 denotes the substring beginning at position
i and extending for m bits. The collection of pattern statistics
extracted from the sequence is aggregated into a feature
representation
X = (x1, x2, ..., xd)
(6)
which captures the structural characteristics of the sequence.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
To illustrate the applicability of the proposed SBC frame-
work, the author conducted experiments using synthetic
keystream sequences generated under controlled conditions.
The primary objective of the evaluation is to determine
whether structural pattern statistics can reveal observable dif-
ferences between cryptographically generated sequences and
sequences drawn from a uniform random distribution.
A. Dataset
Two datasets were generated for the experimental evalua-
tion. The first dataset consists of cipher-generated sequences
that simulate outputs produced by a generic keystream gener-
ator. The second dataset contains sequences sampled from a
uniform random distribution using a cryptographically secure
pseudorandom number generator (PRNG) as is shown in
Algorithm 1.
Each dataset contains 10,000 sequences of length 212 bits,
resulting in a total evaluation corpus of 20,000 sequences.
B. Pattern Analysis
Pattern statistics were extracted from each sequence using
substring frequency analysis. In particular, substring patterns
of length
m ∈{8, 16, 32}
were analyzed in order to capture structural properties at
multiple granularities.
C. Pattern Extraction Procedure
The extraction of structural pattern statistics is performed
using a sliding-window procedure over each sequence. At
each position, a substring of length m is extracted, counted,
and subsequently normalized to produce a pattern frequency
distribution. Algorithm 1 summarizes the pattern extraction
process used in this study.
The procedure begins by initializing an empty frequency
table F for all observed patterns. A sliding window of length
m is then moved across the sequence S. At each position, the
current substring P = Si:i+m−1 is extracted and its occurrence
count is incremented in the table. After scanning the entire
sequence, the frequency counts are normalized to produce
a structural profile that can be compared across different
datasets.
Algorithm 1 Stringology Pattern Extraction
Input: Sequence S, pattern length m
Output: Normalized frequency table F
Initialize frequency table F
for i ←1 to |S| −m + 1 do
P ←Si:i+m−1 Increment F[P]
end
Normalize F
return F
VII. RESULTS
Our experimental evaluation has produced several quantita-
tive metrics describing the structural properties of the analyzed
sequences. These metrics include normalized pattern frequen-
cies, deviation scores, entropy measurements, and pattern
recurrence distributions.
Table I summarizes the observed pattern frequency dif-
ferences between cipher-generated sequences and uniformly
random sequences.
TABLE I
PATTERN FREQUENCY COMPARISON
Pattern Length
Cipher Output
Random Output
8 bits
0.61
0.50
16 bits
0.39
0.25
32 bits
0.17
0.06
This results indicate that cipher-generated sequences ex-
hibit higher normalized frequencies for several pattern lengths
compared to uniformly random sequences, suggesting the
presence of structural regularities introduced by deterministic
cryptographic transformations. To further quantify structural
differences between the two datasets, we compute the devia-
tion metric shown in Eq 7.
D =
X
P
|fc(P) −fr(P)|
(7)
where fc(P) and fr(P) denote normalized pattern fre-
quencies for cipher-generated and random sequences. Table II
presents the resulting deviation scores.
TABLE II
PATTERN DEVIATION METRIC
Pattern Length
Deviation Score
8 bits
0.11
16 bits
0.14
32 bits
0.11
Figure 3 visualizes the deviation scores across different
pattern lengths. To further analyze structural properties, we
compute the pattern entropy defined as
H = −
X
P
p(P) log2 p(P)
(8)

10
15
20
25
30
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
Pattern Length (bits)
Deviation Score
Fig. 3.
Deviation scores between cipher-generated and random sequences
across pattern lengths.
8
16
32
0.2
0.4
0.6
Pattern Length (bits)
Normalized Frequency
Cipher Output
Random
Fig. 4.
Normalized substring pattern frequencies for cipher-generated and
random sequences.
where p(P) represents the probability of observing pattern
P within the sequence.
VIII. DISCUSSION
The experimental findings demonstrate that SBC analysis
can capture structural characteristics in cryptographic se-
quences. The results shown in Table I gives measurable dif-
ferences in normalized pattern frequency distributions between
cipher-generated sequences and uniformly random sequences.
In particular, the observed frequency concentrations for several
pattern lengths suggest that deterministic cryptographic trans-
formations may introduce subtle structural regularities within
the generated sequences.
Consequently, the deviation metric reported in Table II
and visualized in Figure 3 further supports this observation.
The deviation scores quantify the magnitude of structural
differences between cipher-generated and random sequences
by measuring the absolute difference between their pattern
frequency distributions. As shown in Figure 3, the deviation
values remain consistently non-zero across multiple pattern
lengths, indicating that pattern statistics capture measurable
structural signals within the analyzed sequences.
Additional insight can be obtained from the normalized
pattern frequency distributions shown in Figure 4. The compar-
8
16
32
10
20
30
Pattern Length (bits)
Entropy
Cipher Output
Random
Fig. 5. Comparison of pattern entropy between cipher-generated and random
sequences.
ison illustrates that cipher-generated sequences exhibit slightly
higher concentrations of certain substring patterns compared
to uniformly random sequences. While these differences are
relatively small, they demonstrate that localized pattern statis-
tics can reveal structural characteristics that may not be easily
observable through conventional randomness tests alone.
The entropy analysis shown in Figure 5 provides further
evidence regarding the structural behavior of the sequences. As
expected, uniformly random sequences exhibit higher entropy
values, reflecting a more uniform distribution of substring
patterns. In contrast, the slightly lower entropy observed in
cipher-generated sequences suggests minor structural biases
introduced by deterministic internal operations within the
sequence generator.
It is important to emphasize that the structural signals
identified in this study do not imply practical cryptographic
weaknesses. It is worth noting that Modern cryptographic
algorithms are designed to produce outputs that are computa-
tionally indistinguishable from random sequences, and small
structural variations may naturally arise from deterministic
internal operations without compromising security. Instead, the
results presented here should be interpreted as an analytical
tool for studying the structural properties of cryptographic
outputs rather than as evidence of exploitable vulnerabilities.
These findings highlight the potential value of integrating
stringology techniques into cryptographic evaluation work-
flows. While traditional statistical tests focus on global ran-
domness properties, stringology-based methods examine local-
ized structural patterns and substring relationships. The com-
bination of these perspectives may therefore provide a richer
analytical framework for evaluating cryptographic sequence
generators.
It is worth noting that, the concept of SBC opens several
promising research directions. Advanced string processing
methods such as suffix trees, suffix arrays, and longest com-
mon substring analysis could be applied to detect more com-
plex structural patterns within keystream outputs. In addition,
integrating machine learning models with stringology-based

feature extraction may enable the automatic discovery of
structural correlations in large-scale cryptographic datasets.
The aforementioned results indicate that stringology tech-
niques provide a valuable complementary perspective for
analyzing cryptographic sequences. By bridging the fields
of string processing and cryptographic analysis, stringology-
based cryptology offers a new process framework for in-
vestigating the structural robustness of modern cryptographic
primitives.
IX. CONCLUSION
This paper introduced the concept of Stringology-Based
Cryptology (SC), which applies classical string processing
techniques to analyze cryptographic outputs. By interpreting
cryptographic sequences as symbolic strings, pattern detection
algorithms can reveal structural characteristics that may not
be captured by traditional statistical tests. Future research
will explore advanced string processing methods, integration
with machine learning techniques, and applications to broader
classes of cryptographic primitives.