1
A Novel Framework for Transmitter Privacy in
Integrated Sensing and Communication
Vaibhav Kumar, Member, IEEE, Ahmad Bazzi, Senior Member, IEEE,
Christina Pöpper, Senior Member, IEEE, and Marwa Chafii, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) sys-
tems introduce new privacy risks, since an unintended sensing
node may exploit the shared radio waveform to infer transmitter-
related information even when the communication payload itself
remains secure. In this paper, transmitter privacy, defined here
as limiting unauthorized inference of transmitter-related infor-
mation through channel estimation, is investigated in a recon-
figurable intelligent surface (RIS)-aided multi-antenna wireless
system comprising a transmitter, a legitimate receiver, a malicious
sensor, and a RIS. The malicious sensor is assumed to estimate the
transmitter–sensor channel, and the acquired channel state infor-
mation may subsequently be used for unauthorized sensing, in-
ference, or related signal-processing tasks. To counter this threat,
a privacy-oriented design is considered in which the transmitter
employs a superposition-based signaling strategy combining a
message-bearing signal and transmit-side artificial noise (AN),
while the RIS is used to shape the propagation environment in
a privacy-aware manner. The channel-estimation performance
at the malicious sensor is first characterized under imperfect
prior knowledge, and both the true and predicted mean-square-
error expressions are derived. Based on this characterization, a
joint active–passive beamforming design problem is formulated
to maximize the malicious sensor’s predicted channel-estimation
error subject to a communication quality-of-service requirement,
a transmit-power budget, and the unit-modulus constraints of
the RIS. The resulting non-convex problem is addressed via a
numerically efficient alternating optimization framework based
on an augmented Lagrangian reformulation. Numerical results
show that RIS-assisted propagation shaping can significantly
impair unauthorized channel estimation compared to the non-
RIS counterpart while maintaining reliable communication, and
further reveal that the resulting privacy gains extend to a
more direct sensing metric, namely the angle-of-arrival (AoA)
estimation accuracy at the malicious sensor.
Index Terms—Sensing-centric security, integrated sensing and
communication (ISAC), reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS),
channel estimation
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NTEGRATED sensing and communication (ISAC) is
emerging as an important architectural direction for future
wireless networks, as it enables both data transmission and
Vaibhav Kumar, Ahmad Bazzi, and Marwa Chafii are with the Wire-
less Research Lab, Engineering Division, New York University Abu Dhabi
(NYUAD), UAE. Ahmad Bazzi and Marwa Chafii are also with NYU
WIRELESS, NYU Tandon School of Engineering, NewYork, USA (e-mail:
vaibhav.kumar@ieee.org; ahmad.bazzi@nyu.edu; marwa.chafii@nyu.edu).
Christina Pöpper is heading the Cyber Security & Privacy (CSP) Lab, Center
for Cyber Security, Science Division, New York University Abu Dhabi
(NYUAD), UAE (e-mail: christina.poepper@nyu.edu).
This work was supported by the Center for Cyber Security through New
York University Abu Dhabi Research Institute under Award G1104. The work
of Marwa Chafii was also supported in part by Tamkeen under the Research
Institute NYUAD grant CG017.
environmental sensing over a common radio platform [1]–
[3]. Through the shared use of spectrum, infrastructure,
hardware chain, and signaling resources, ISAC can improve
spectrum utilization, reduce deployment cost, and support a
broad range of emerging services, including localization and
tracking, autonomous driving, industrial automation, smart
environments, digital twins, and immersive extended-reality
applications [4]. These advantages have attracted significant
interest from academia and industry, and have positioned ISAC
as a realistic design paradigm for next-generation wireless
systems.
This momentum is also reflected in the ongoing 3GPP
Release 19 effort, where ISAC has entered formal study
activities through TR 22.837 [5], service-level specification
efforts through TS 22.137 [6], and channel modeling efforts
in TR 38.901 [7]. More broadly, this indicates that future
wireless networks may no longer treat sensing as a secondary
function supported indirectly by communication, but instead
as a native capability embedded into the network architecture.
At the same time, however, such close integration also brings
new concerns. When communication and sensing share the
same radio interface, the transmitted and reflected signals may
reveal much more information about users, devices, and the
surrounding environment than in conventional communication-
only systems. Consequently, in addition to the performance
gains enabled by ISAC, it becomes necessary to understand
the security and privacy risks created by this tight coupling
between communication and environmental inference.
Recent research has begun to address the security challenges
of ISAC from a physical-layer perspective [8], [9]. A first
line of work focuses on secrecy-oriented secure ISAC design,
including secure beamforming [10]–[12], artificial-noise (AN)
injection [13]–[15], and secrecy-rate maximization [16], [17],
where the objective is to protect confidential communication
while maintaining the desired sensing and communication
functionalities. The aforementioned direction has also been ex-
tended to reconfigurable intelligent metasurface (RIS)-assisted
settings, where the programmable propagation environment
is jointly optimized with the transmission design to enhance
communication confidentiality [18]–[22]. In parallel, covert
ISAC has also gained significant attention, where the objective
is not merely to secure the message content but to conceal the
very existence of communication from a warden [23]–[25].
Compared to conventional communication-only systems,
security in ISAC has a fundamentally broader meaning, since
it involves not only communication-centric security but also
sensing-centric security. Communication-centric security fol-
lows the classical physical-layer security paradigm, where
arXiv:2604.16068v1 [eess.SP] 17 Apr 2026

2
the goal is to prevent an unintended receiver from decoding
the confidential message. In ISAC, communication-centric
security can be broadly achieved in two ways. When the
eavesdropper is spatially separated from the sensing target,
the transmitter may steer nulls toward the suspicious direction
to degrade the received signal quality at the eavesdropper.
When the eavesdropper coincides with the sensing target, the
transmitter may instead inject strong interference or AN so as
to impair message decoding at that node. However, such ap-
proaches are not sufficient for sensing-centric security, where
the malicious node may not be interested in the communication
message at all, but rather in performing channel estimation,
parameter estimation, detection, localization, or other sensing-
related inference tasks. In this case, high interference or noise
does not necessarily eliminate the sensing threat, and steering
a null toward the malicious sensor may itself be infeasible,
particularly when the transmitter has only a small number of
antennas, as is typical for user devices. Therefore, unlike con-
ventional physical-layer security, sensing-centric security in
ISAC cannot be characterized solely through communication
secrecy, and instead calls for dedicated designs that explicitly
limit unauthorized sensing and inference.
Encouragingly, a small but growing body of work have
begun to move beyond communication-centric secrecy and
toward sensing-centric security in ISAC. In particular, RIS-
assisted target-obfuscation designs have been developed to
protect a sensing region from an adversarial detector by jointly
optimizing the transmit beamformer, RIS configuration, and
RIS meta-atom assignment so as to reduce the detector’s sens-
ing capability while preserving the intended communication
and sensing functions [26]. In a related direction, transmitter
location privacy has been investigated through beam-pattern
obfuscation, where the angular power distribution observed
by a sensing-capable receiver is deliberately reshaped so that
a false direction appears dominant without nulling the line-
of-sight component, thereby showing that privacy may be
achieved through controlled obfuscation rather than pure sup-
pression [27]. More recently, sensing-secure ISAC signaling
has been proposed via ambiguity-function engineering, where
artificial ghost targets are introduced into the unauthorized
observer’s range profile to degrade its sensing performance
without requiring prior knowledge of the observer’s channel
state information (CSI) [28].
These works constitute important first steps toward sensing-
centric security, since they explicitly recognize that unautho-
rized sensing may remain possible even when communication
secrecy is preserved. Here, sensing-centric security refers to
the broader objective of preventing, limiting, or degrading ma-
licious sensing capabilities in ISAC systems, whereas sensing
privacy more specifically concerns protecting sensitive infor-
mation about legitimate entities from being inferred through
sensing. In this paper, we use the term transmitter privacy to
denote the ability of a transmitter to communicate while limit-
ing an unauthorized sensing node’s ability to infer transmitter-
related information from the shared waveform, particularly
through estimation of the transmitter–sensor channel and the
downstream inference tasks enabled by that estimate, such as
localization, tracking, or AoA inference. Under this definition,
transmitter privacy is broader than transmitter location privacy,
which focuses only on concealing the transmitter position,
and is also distinct from target obfuscation or waveform-
level sensing degradation, which primarily protect the sensed
target or disrupt a particular sensing output. By contrast, the
setting of interest here focuses on malicious channel estima-
tion as a fundamental leakage mechanism, since an estimate
of the transmitter–sensor channel can serve as an enabler
for subsequent coherent processing, parameter inference, and
environment-aware sensing tasks.
Motivated by the above observations, this paper studies RIS-
aided transmitter privacy in a multi-antenna wireless system
with a legitimate receiver and a malicious sensing node.
The malicious node is assumed to estimate transmitter-related
channel information from the received waveform and use it for
unauthorized sensing or inference. To impair such malicious
estimation, we propose a privacy-oriented joint design of the
transmit precoder and RIS reflection coefficients, where AN
and RIS-assisted propagation shaping are exploited to degrade
the sensing capability of the malicious node while guaran-
teeing reliable communication at the legitimate receiver. The
resulting design problem is non-convex due to the coupling
between active transmission and passive propagation control.
An efficient alternating optimization (AO)-based approach is
developed to solve it. The results show that the proposed RIS-
aided design achieves clear transmitter-privacy gains compared
with a non-RIS counterpart.
The main contributions of this work are summarized as
follows:
1) A RIS-aided framework for transmitter privacy is devel-
oped for a wireless system with a legitimate receiver
and a malicious sensing node, where transmitter pri-
vacy is defined as limiting the unauthorized inference
of transmitter-related information through malicious es-
timation of the transmitter–sensor channel. Within this
framework, malicious channel estimation is treated as a
fundamental leakage mechanism that can enable subse-
quent sensing and inference tasks, and transmitter privacy
is operationalized through the deliberate degradation of
such unauthorized channel estimation.
2) A privacy-oriented joint design problem is formulated
for the transmit precoder and RIS reflection coefficients,
with the objective of maximizing the malicious sensor’s
predicted channel-estimation error while ensuring reli-
able communication at the legitimate receiver under a
transmit-power budget and the unit-modulus constraints
of the RIS.
3) To solve the resulting non-convex problem, an efficient
AO-based algorithm is proposed for the joint design of
active transmit signaling and passive RIS control, and its
convergence and computational complexity are analyzed.
4) Numerical results demonstrate that RIS-assisted prop-
agation shaping can significantly degrade unauthorized
channel estimation relative to non-RIS benchmarks while
preserving the desired communication performance, fur-
ther illustrate the effects of key system parameters such as
the RIS size, antenna configuration, observation length,
transmit power, and prior mismatch, and show that the
resulting privacy gains also manifest in degraded angle-
of-arrival (AoA) estimation at the malicious sensor.

3
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents the considered system model and introduces
the channel-estimation framework at the malicious sensor,
along with the adopted privacy metric and problem formu-
lation. Section III develops the proposed AO-based design
for the joint optimization of the transmit precoder and RIS
reflection coefficients. Section IV provides numerical results
to evaluate the privacy performance of the proposed scheme
and to illustrate the impact of key system parameters. Finally,
Section V concludes the paper.
Notation: Bold uppercase and lowercase letters denote
matrices and vectors, respectively. The set of all M × N
complex-valued matrices is denoted by CM×N, and the set
of positive real numbers is denoted by R+. For a matrix
X, the transpose, Hermitian transpose, trace, determinant,
Frobenius norm, and expectation are denoted by XT, XH,
tr(X), det(X), ∥X∥F, and E{X}, respectively. The notation
∥· ∥denotes the Euclidean norm for vectors. The operator
diag(x) returns a diagonal matrix whose main diagonal is
formed by the entries of x, vecd(X) denotes the column
vector formed by the diagonal entries of X, vec(X) denotes
the column vector obtained by stacking the columns of X,
unvecM×N(x) denotes the inverse operation of vec(·) that
reshapes x into an M × N matrix, and X ⊗Y denotes the
Kronecker product of X and Y. For a real-valued function
f(·), the gradient with respect to a complex-valued variable
X is defined as ∇Xf(·) ≜
∂f(·)
∂X∗=
1
2
h
∂f(·)
∂ℜ{X} + j ∂f(·)
∂ℑ{X}
i
,
where X∗denotes the complex conjugate of X, and ℜ{X}
and ℑ{X} denote its real and imaginary parts, respectively.
The operator d(·) denotes the differential of its argument. The
Euclidean projection of x onto a feasible set X is defined as
ΠX (x) ≜argmin˜x∈X ∥˜x −x∥2.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider the RIS-aided communication system shown
in Fig. 1, which consists of a transmitter (A), a legitimate
receiver (B), a malicious sensor (S), and an RIS (R).1 The
numbers of antennas at A, B, and S are denoted by mA, mB,
and mS, respectively, while the RIS is equipped with mR
reflecting meta-atoms. The wireless channels corresponding
to the A–B, A–S, A–R, R–B, and R–S links are denoted
by HAB ∈CmB×mA, HAS ∈CmS×mA, HAR ∈CmR×mA,
HRB ∈CmB×mR, and HRS ∈CmS×mR, respectively. In this
system, A communicates with B, while S seeks to estimate
the transmitter–sensor channel HAS, thereby enabling unau-
thorized sensing and inference about the transmitter.
A. Transmit Signal Model
The transmitter adopts a superposition-based signaling strat-
egy that combines a message-bearing communication signal
with a transmit-side AN component. Accordingly, the trans-
mitted signal vector is expressed as
x = Fcwc + Fsws,
(1)
1For analytical tractability, this work restricts attention to a single legitimate
receiver and a single malicious sensor; extensions to multi-user and multi-
attacker settings are left for future work.
Fig. 1. A typical RIS-aided communication system with a malicious sensor.
where wc ∈Cmmin×1 denotes the communication symbol vec-
tor, with 1 ≤mmin ≤min{mA, mB}, and Fc ∈CmA×mmin
denotes the corresponding communication precoder. In ad-
dition, ws ∈CmA×1 denotes the transmit-side AN vector,
and Fs
∈CmA×mA is its associated precoder. Notably,
the dimensionality of Fs depends only on the transmitter-
side dimensions and is therefore independent of the sensor
antenna configuration. We assume that E{wc} = E{ws} = 0,
E{wcwH
c } = Immin, E{wswH
s } = ImA, and E{wcwH
s } = 0.
Unless otherwise stated, we set mmin = min{mA, mB} for
notational simplicity.
The AN component is introduced to impair the sensor’s
ability to estimate HAS accurately, thereby enhancing trans-
mitter privacy. Since the AN signal is given by Fsws and
E{wswH
s } = I, its covariance is FsFH
s , which shows that
the AN spatial covariance is optimized implicitly through the
precoder Fs. Moreover, the dedicated AN precoder provides an
additional spatial degree of freedom for RIS-assisted channel
manipulation. In particular, by jointly designing Fs and the
RIS reflection coefficients, the reflected interference can be
spatially shaped and preferentially directed toward the sensor
through the cascaded A–R–S link, while maintaining the
desired communication performance at the legitimate receiver.
B. Communication Model
Using (1), the received signal at B is given by
yB = (HAB + HRBΘHAR)x + nB = ZABx + nB,
(2)
where Θ = diag(θ) denotes the RIS reflection matrix, and
nB ∼CN(0, σ2
BImB) denotes the additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) vector at B. Moreover, the RIS reflection-
coefficient vector is modeled as θ = [θ1, θ2, . . . , θmR]T ∈
CmR×1, where θκ = exp(jϕκ) with ϕκ ∈[0, 2π) denoting
the phase shift induced by the κ-th RIS meta-atom, for all
κ ∈MR ≜{1, 2, . . . , mR}.
We assume that A has imperfect CSI for the A–B and R–
B links.2 Specifically, we model HAB = bHAB + ∆AB and
2This assumption is adopted for analytical tractability and to isolate the
impact of RIS-assisted interference shaping and AN design. It is also standard
in RIS-aided systems, since the A–R link can often be estimated more
accurately through calibration and control signaling between the transmitter
and the RIS controller, and its estimation errors are comparatively less critical
to the communication-privacy trade-off considered in this work.

4
HRB = bHRB +∆RB, where bHAB and bHRB are the available
channel estimates, and ∆AB and ∆RB denote the correspond-
ing CSI error matrices. The entries of ∆AB and ∆RB are
assumed to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.)
and follow CN(0, ς2
AB) and CN(0, ς2
RB), respectively [29].
Based on (2), the achievable rate at B for a given (F, θ),
measured in nats/s/Hz, is conservatively modeled as
CAB(F, θ) = ln det
 I + bZABFcFH
c bZH
ABQ−1
AB

,
(3)
where F ≜[Fc, Fs], bZAB = bHAB + bHRBΘHAR denotes
the estimated composite A–B channel, and QAB denotes the
interference-plus-noise covariance matrix. Using the indepen-
dence of ∆AB and ∆RB, a conservative approximation3 of
QAB is given by
QAB = σ2
BImB + bZABFsFH
s bZH
AB
+E

∆AB
 FcFH
c +FsFH
s

∆H
AB
 
+E
 ∆RBΘHAR

×
 FcFH
c +FsFH
s
 ∆RBΘHAR
H 
⟨a⟩
= bZABFsFH
s bZH
AB +

σ2
B + ς2
AB tr
 FcFH
c +FsFH
s

+ ς2
RB tr(HAR
 FcFH
c +FsFH
s

HH
AR)

ImB,
(4)
where step ⟨a⟩follows from the identity E{XYXH} =
σ2 tr(Y)I for a random matrix X with i.i.d. entries distributed
as CN(0, σ2) and any deterministic matrix Y of compatible
dimension.
C. Sensing Model
By listening to the transmission from A, the sensor S
attempts to estimate the channel HAS. To this end, S collects
the transmitted signal from A over K time-slots. For analytical
tractability, we assume that all channels remain unchanged
over these K time-slots. With a slight abuse of notation,
we denote the transmit signal from A over K time-slots by
X = Xc + Xs, where Xc = FcWc, Xs = FsWs, Wc =
[wc,1, . . . , wc,K] ∈Cmmin×K, and Ws = [ws,1, . . . , ws,K] ∈
CmA×K. Here, wc,k and ws,k denote the communication and
AN vectors transmitted during the k-th time-slot, respectively,
for k ∈K ≜{1, 2, . . . , K}. Accordingly, the observation at S
can be written as
YS =
 HAS + HRSΘHAR

X + NS
= HASX + HRSΘHARX + NS,
(5)
where the entries of NS are i.i.d. and follow CN(0, σ2
S), and
NS denotes the AWGN matrix at S. By vectorizing (5), the
observation can be expressed as
yS = vec(YS) = eXhAS + ˘XhRS + nS,
(6)
where eX = XT ⊗ImS, ˘X =
 XTHT
ARΘ

⊗ImS, hAS =
vec(HAS), hRS = vec(HRS), and nS = vec(NS). Here, we
have used the identity vec(XY) = vec(IXY) =
 YT ⊗
I

vec(X). We model the true channel statistics of hAS and
hRS as hAS ∼CN(µAS, ΣAS) and hRS ∼CN(0, ΣRS),
3The approximation is conservative because the CSI-error terms are not
exploited as part of the useful signal; instead, their contribution is entirely
incorporated into QAB as effective interference-plus-noise via their second-
order moments. As a result, the rate expression is a pessimistic surrogate for
the actual achievable rate under imperfect CSI.
respectively.4 To account for imperfect prior knowledge at
S, we assume that only erroneous statistical information is
available, namely bµS,AS, bΣS,AS, and bΣS,RS, which denote the
presumed mean of hAS, the presumed covariance of hAS, and
the presumed covariance of hRS, respectively.
Under the LMMSE framework [30], the estimate of hAS at
S is given by
bhS,AS = bµS,AS + RS(yS −eXbµS,AS),
(7)
where RS denotes the mismatched LMMSE gain and is given
by
RS = bΣS,AS eXH  eXbΣS,AS eXH+ ˘XS bΣS,RS ˘XH
S +σ2
SImSmA
−1,
(8)
where ˘XS = (XT bHT
S,ARΘ) ⊗ImS, and bHS,AR = HAR +
δS,AR denotes the estimate of HAR available at S. Note that yS
is generated using the true cascaded term, and hence depends
on ˘X, whereas the sensor designs the LMMSE gain using its
presumed model, and hence depends on ˘XS and the erroneous
priors.
The following proposition characterizes the mean, covari-
ance, and Bayesian MSE of the estimation error at S under
mismatched prior information.
Proposition 1. Define the estimation error as eS ≜hAS −
bhS,AS. Then, for a given (F, θ), its mean is given by
E{eS} =
 ImSmA −RS eX
 µAS−bµS,AS

,
(9)
and its covariance is given by
Cov{eS} = (ImSmA −RS eX)ΣAS(ImSmA −RS eX)H
+ RS(ΣARS+σ2
SImSmA)RH
S,
(10)
where ΣARS ≜˘XΣRS ˘XH. Consequently, the true Bayesian
MSE at S is given by (11), shown on the next page.
Proof: See Appendix A.
It is worth emphasizing that, in (11), the filter RS is
designed using the priors available at S, i.e., bΣS,AS, bΣS,RS,
and ˘XS, as indicated in (8).
Now, we assume that A also has erroneous prior infor-
mation about hAS and hRS, which is modeled as bhA,AS ∼
CN(bµA,AS, bΣA,AS) and bhA,RS ∼CN(0, bΣA,RS), respec-
tively. Based on these priors, the corresponding mismatched
MSE expression for HAS at A is given by (12), shown on the
next page, where bΣA,ARS ≜˘XbΣA,RS ˘XH, and the predicted
LMMSE filter is defined as
RA = bΣA,AS eXH( eXbΣA,AS eXH+ ˘XbΣA,RS ˘XH+σ2
SImSmA)−1.
(13)
However, since A is unaware that its priors are erroneous, the
bias term (i.e., ∥(ImSmA −RA eX)(µAS −bµA,AS)∥2) is not
accessible to A. Therefore, the predicted MSE available at A
is given by
ξpred(F, θ)
4The non-zero-mean model for hAS is retained because hAS is the channel
to be inferred by the malicious sensor, and allowing a non-zero mean provides
a more general prior model that can capture a deterministic component.
By contrast, the zero-mean assumption for hRS is adopted primarily for
analytical tractability. Specifically, since hRS appears as a nuisance term in
the cascaded RIS contribution, modeling it as zero-mean ensures that its effect
is fully captured by ΣRS, which considerably simplifies the derivation of the
mismatched linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE) estimator and the
associated Bayesian MSE expressions.

5
MSEtrue(F, θ) = ∥(ImSmA −RS eX)(µAS −bµS,AS)∥2
+ tr

(ImSmA −RS eX)ΣAS(ImSmA −RS eX)H
+ tr

RS(ΣARS + σ2
SImSmA)RH
S

.
(11)
MSEpred(F, θ) = ∥(ImSmA −RA eX)(µAS −bµA,AS)∥2
+ tr

(ImSmA −RA eX)bΣA,AS(ImSmA −RA eX)H
+ tr

RA(bΣA,ARS + σ2
SImSmA)RH
A

.
(12)
= tr

(ImSmA −RA eX)bΣA,AS(ImSmA −RA eX)H 
+ tr

RA(bΣA,ARS + σ2
SImSmA)RH
A
 
. (14)
D. Problem Formulation for Transmitter Privacy
We now formulate an optimization problem to jointly design
the precoding matrix F and the passive beamforming vector
θ so as to maximize ξpred(F, θ), while guaranteeing a com-
munication QoS between A and B. The resulting optimization
problem is given by
maximize
F,θ
ξpred(F, θ),
(15a)
subject to CAB(F, θ) ≥CAB,
(15b)
∥F∥2
F ≤pmax,
(15c)
|θκ| = 1, ∀κ ∈MR.
(15d)
In (15), the objective is to maximize the predicted MSE at A.
Constraint (15b) ensures that the achievable rate at B is no
smaller than the threshold CAB, (15c) imposes the maximum
transmit-power budget pmax, and (15d) enforces the unit-
modulus constraint on each RIS meta-atom. The formulation
in (15) captures the trade-off between reliable communication
at B and transmitter privacy against S.
Remark 1. It is worth emphasizing that, in (15), the objective
is to maximize the predicted MSE at S based on the prior
information available at A. Solving (15) yields the optimal
transmit design (Fopt, θopt) to be employed by A. For per-
formance evaluation, however, the true MMSE achieved at S
is computed using (11) for (Fopt, θopt).
It is also important to note that the value of ξpred(F, θ) can
be very small, which may lead to numerical instability during
the optimization process. To address this issue, we define the
normalized objective
¯ξpred(F, θ) =
1
tr
 ΣAS
ξpred(F, θ).
(16)
Using (16), the optimization problem in (15) can be equiva-
lently reformulated as
maximize
F,θ
¯ξpred(F, θ) | (15b), (15c), (15d)
 
.
(17)
It is readily seen that (17) is non-convex due to the objective
function in (16), the QoS constraint in (15b), and the unit-
modulus constraint in (15d). Moreover, the coupling between
the optimization variables F and θ, together with the equality
constraint in (15d), makes the problem particularly challenging
to solve. In addition, developing a low-complexity solution
to (17) is crucial, since the computational burden can become
prohibitive when the number of RIS meta-atoms is large.
Motivated by these challenges, the next section develops a
numerically efficient solution for (17).
III. AO-BASED PROPOSED SOLUTION
Due to the non-convexity of the rate constraint in (15b),
directly handling (17) is challenging. To facilitate the subse-
quent algorithm design, we first reformulate this constraint.
Specifically, for a non-negative real variable τ, (15b) can be
equivalently written as
1 + τ −
1
CAB
CAB(F, θ)
|
{z
}
≜f(F,θ,CAB,τ)
= 0.
(18)
Then, following the primal-dual decomposition (PDD) frame-
work in [31], the augmented Lagrangian associated with (17)
can be expressed as
gν,ρ(F, θ, τ) = ¯ξpred(F, θ) −νf(F, θ, CAB, τ)
−1
2ρf 2(F, θ, CAB, τ),
(19)
where ν is the Lagrange multiplier and ρ is the penalty
parameter. Using (19), the problem in (17) can be transformed
into
maximize
F,θ,τ

gν,ρ(F, θ, τ) | τ ∈R+, (15c), (15d)
 
.
(20)
It can be observed that the constraints in (20) are now
decoupled, whereas the design variables remain coupled in
the objective function. Motivated by this structure, we adopt an
AO-based scheme to obtain a stationary solution. In particular,
we employ an alternating projected gradient ascent method to
develop a low-complexity solution to (20). Before presenting
the proposed algorithm, we first derive the complex-valued
gradients of gν,ρ(F, θ, τ) with respect to Fc, Fs, and θ in the
following theorems.
Theorem 1. A closed-form expression for ∇Fgν,ρ(F, θ, τ)
is
given
by

∇Fcgν,ρ(F, θ, τ), ∇Fsgν,ρ(F, θ, τ)

,
where
∇Fcgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) and ∇Fsgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) are respectively given
by (21) and (22), shown on the next page.
Proof: See Appendix B.
Theorem 2. A closed-form expression for ∇θgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) is
given by (23), shown on the next page.
Proof: See Appendix C.
Equipped with Theorems 1 and 2, we now develop an itera-
tive AO framework to obtain a stationary solution to (20). The
overall AO-based procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Specifically, the algorithm starts from initial values F(0) and
θ(0), while setting τ (0) = ν = 0, µF = µθ = 100, ρ = 10,
and κ = 0.1. For given (ν, ρ), the variables (F, θ, τ) are
updated via Algorithm 2, whereas the Lagrange multiplier
ν and the penalty parameter ρ are updated in steps 4 and 5 of
Algorithm 1, respectively.

6
∇Fcgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) =
1
tr
 ΣAS
 unvecmA×mmin
 
vecT  MT
c + UT
c
 ImA ⊗G
T
−
1
CAB

ν + 1
ρf(F, θ, CAB, τ)
 
tr
 DAB
 ς2
ABImA + ς2
RBHH
ARHAR

−bZH
ABE−1
ABbZAB

Fc.
(21)
∇Fsgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) =
1
tr
 ΣAS
 unvecmA×mA
 
vecT  MT
s + UT
s
 ImA ⊗Gs
T
−
1
CAB

ν + 1
ρf(F, θ, CAB, τ)
 
tr
 DAB
 bZH
ABbZAB + ς2
ABImA + ς2
RBHH
ARHAR

Fs.
(22)
∇θgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) = vecd
h
1
tr
 ΣAS
 unvecmR×mR
 
vecT  VT
3 + JT
4
 ImR ⊗Gθ
Ti
−
1
CAB

ν + 1
ρf(F, θ, CAB, τ)
 
vecd
  bHH
RBLABHH
AR

.
(23)
Algorithm
1: AO-Based Proposed Algorithm to
Solve (20)
Input: F(0), θ(0), τ (0), µF, µθ, ν, ρ, κ
Output: Fopt, θopt
1 ȷ ←1;
2 repeat
/* Update (F, θ, τ) for fixed (ν, ρ)
*/
3
Obtain
 F(ȷ+1), θ(ȷ+1), τ (ȷ+1)
via Algorithm 2;
/* Update ν
*/
4
ν ←ν + 1
ρf
 F(ȷ+1), θ(ȷ+1), CAB, τ (ȷ+1)
;
/* Update ρ
*/
5
ρ ←κρ;
/* Update iteration counter
*/
6
ȷ ←ȷ + 1;
7 until convergence;
/* Final assignment
*/
8 Fopt ←F(ȷ), θopt ←θ(ȷ);
In Algorithm 2, the transmit precoding matrix F is first
updated for fixed (θ, τ) in step 4, where µF denotes the step-
size and F denotes the feasible set of transmit precoders,
defined as
F ≜

F ∈CmA×(mmin+mA) : ∥F∥2
F ≤pmax
 
.
(24)
The projection onto the feasible set F is given by
ΠF{eF} = √pmax eF/ max

∥eF∥F, √pmax
 
.
(25)
After updating F, the RIS beamforming vector is updated. The
corresponding feasible set ϑ is given by
ϑ ≜

θ ∈CmR×1 : |θκ| = 1, ∀κ ∈MR
 
,
(26)
and
the
projection
onto
ϑ
is
given
by
Πϑ{eθ}
=
[¯θ1, . . . , ¯θmR]T, where for each κ ∈MR, we have
¯θκ =
(eθκ/|eθκ|,
if eθκ ̸= 0,
exp(jϕ), ϕ ∈[0, 2π),
otherwise.
(27)
Finally, it is worth noting that although we initialize the step-
sizes as µF = µθ = 100, their effective values at each iteration
are determined via a backtracking line search based on the
Armijo–Goldstein condition [32].
a) Convergence Analysis: The convergence of the pro-
posed algorithm can be justified within the standard penalty
Algorithm
2:
Penalty-Based
AO
Algorithm
to
Solve (20) for Fixed (ν, ρ)
Input: F(ȷ), θ(ȷ), τ (ȷ), µF, µθ, ν, ρ
Output: F(¯ȷ+1), θ(¯ȷ+1), τ (¯ȷ+1)
/* Initial assignment
*/
1 ¯ȷ ←1;
2 F(¯ȷ) ←F(ȷ), θ(¯ȷ) ←θ(ȷ), τ (¯ȷ) ←τ (ȷ);
3 repeat
/* Update F for fixed (θ, τ)
*/
4
F(¯ȷ+1) ←
ΠF

F(¯ȷ) + µF∇F
 gν,ρ
 F(¯ȷ), θ(¯ȷ), τ (¯ȷ) 
;
/* Update θ for fixed (F, τ)
*/
5
θ(¯ȷ+1) ←
Πϑ

θ(¯ȷ) + µθ∇θ
 gν,ρ
 F(¯ȷ+1), θ(¯ȷ), τ (¯ȷ) 
;
/* Update τ for fixed (F, θ)
*/
6
τ (¯ȷ+1) ←
max

0,
1
CAB CAB
 F(¯ȷ+1), θ(¯ȷ+1)
−1 −νρ
 
;
/* Update iteration counter
*/
7
¯ȷ ←¯ȷ + 1;
8 until convergence;
/* Update assignment
*/
9 F(ȷ+1) ←F(¯ȷ), θ(ȷ+1) ←θ(¯ȷ), τ (ȷ+1) ←τ (¯ȷ);
dual decomposition framework combined with cyclic block
coordinate optimization. For any fixed multiplier–penalty pair
(ν, ρ), Algorithm 2 generates a sequence by successively
updating the blocks F, θ, and τ through the corresponding
subproblems of the augmented formulation in (20), while
keeping the remaining blocks fixed. Since each block up-
date is designed to optimize the augmented objective with
respect to the corresponding variable block, the resulting inner-
iteration objective sequence is monotonically nondecreasing.
Furthermore, the transmit power constraint and the unit-
modulus RIS constraint ensure that the feasible set associated
with (F, θ) is compact, whereas the auxiliary variable τ is
bounded by construction. Hence, the augmented objective is
bounded from above over the feasible set, which guarantees
convergence of the inner objective sequence; accordingly, the
inner loop converges to a first-order stationary point of (20)
for the given (ν, ρ). In the outer loop, the multiplier update

7
is given by ν(ȷ+1) = ν(ȷ) +
1
ρ(ȷ) f(F(ȷ+1), θ(ȷ+1), τ (ȷ+1)),
where f(F, θ, τ) = 0 denotes the equality representation
of the transformed QoS constraint. Equivalently, this yields
f(F(ȷ+1), θ(ȷ+1), τ (ȷ+1)) = ρ(ȷ) ν(ȷ+1) −ν(ȷ)
. Therefore, if
the multiplier sequence {ν(ȷ)} is bounded and the penalty pa-
rameter satisfies ρ(ȷ) →0, then the equality-constraint residual
vanishes asymptotically, namely, f(F(ȷ+1), θ(ȷ+1), τ (ȷ+1)) →
0, thereby establishing asymptotic primal feasibility. Conse-
quently, every accumulation point generated by Algorithm 1
is feasible for the transformed problem (20) and satis-
fies its first-order optimality condition, and therefore fulfills
the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions of (20). Finally,
since (18) constitutes an equivalent reformulation of the QoS
constraint in (15b), the transformed problem in (20) is equiv-
alent to the original problem in (15). It follows that any
accumulation point satisfying the KKT conditions of (20) is
also a KKT point of (15).
b) Complexity Analysis: It is evident that the compu-
tational complexity of the proposed PDD-AO framework is
dominated by the inner updates in Algorithm 2. Hence, the
complexity of Algorithm 1 can be quantified by counting
the required number of complex multiplications in one inner
iteration of Algorithm 2 and then multiplying by the num-
bers of outer and inner iterations. Let mF ≜mmin + mA
denote the number of columns of F = [Fc, Fs], and let Iout
and Iin denote the numbers of outer and inner iterations,
respectively. First, consider the update of F in Step 4 of
Algorithm 2. From Theorem 1, the dominant cost in eval-
uating ∇Fgν,ρ(F, θ, τ) comes from: i) forming the matrix
X = FW and the associated cascaded sensing terms, which
requires O(mAnFK+mRmAKmS) operations; ii) construct-
ing and inverting the predicted LMMSE covariance matrix
eXbΣA,AS eXH+ ˘XbΣA,RS ˘XH+σ2
SI of dimension KmS×KmS,
whose complexity is O((KmS)3); and iii) evaluating the
communication-related matrices QAB, EAB, and DAB, whose
dominant cost is O(m3
B), while the remaining matrix prod-
ucts contribute O(mAnFmB). Moreover, the projection onto
the Frobenius-norm ball in (25) has complexity O(mAnF).
Therefore, the total complexity associated with the F-update
is O((KmS)3+m3
B+mAnF(K+mB)+mRmAKmS). Next,
consider the update of θ in Step 5 of Algorithm 2. From The-
orem 2, the dominant operations in evaluating ∇θgν,ρ(F, θ, τ)
again include the inversion of the same KmS × KmS co-
variance matrix and the computation of the communication-
side inverse/factorization, which contribute O((KmS)3) and
O(m3
B), respectively. However, unlike a naïve implementation,
the gradient in (23) involves the operator vecd(·), so only
the diagonal entries of the intermediate mR × mR matrices
are required. In addition, the commutation matrices appearing
in the derivative expressions are used only as permutation
operators and need not be explicitly constructed. Consequently,
the RIS-related arithmetic is obtained by directly evaluating
the required mR diagonal bilinear forms, which incurs com-
plexity O(mRmA(KmS + mB)), while the projection onto
the unit-modulus set in (27) is elementwise and has negligible
complexity. Thus, the total complexity of the θ-update is
O((KmS)3+m3
B+mAnFK +mRmA(KmS+mB)). Finally,
the update of τ in Step 6 is available in closed form and
therefore has negligible complexity. Putting these observations
together, the per-inner-iteration complexity of Algorithm 2
can be expressed as O
 2(KmS)3+2m3
B+mAnF(2K+mB)+
mRmA(2KmS + mB)

.
Accordingly, the overall computational complexity of Algo-
rithm 1 is given by
O
 IoutIin

2(KmS)3 + 2m3
B + mAnF(2K + mB)
+ mRmA(2KmS + mB)

.
It is worth noting that, because only the diagonal terms are
needed in the θ-gradient and the commutation matrices are
implemented implicitly, the dependence on the number of RIS
meta-atoms mR is linear rather than quadratic or cubic. Hence,
under a practical implementation, the dominant computational
burden arises from the sensing- and communication-side ma-
trix inversions, whereas the RIS-related operations remain
scalable even for large mR.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we provide comprehensive numerical results
to evaluate the performance of the system under consideration
and provide detailed discussion on the results to obtain impor-
tant system design insights. For this purpose, we first provide
the details of the system setup, followed by numerical results
and corresponding discussion.
A. System Setup
The transmitter (A), receiver (B), RIS (R), and sensor
(S) are located at (0, 0, 0) m, (100, 20, 5) m, (50, 10, 5) m,
and (20, 5, 0) m, respectively. The adopted node geometry is
similar to representative setups commonly used in the RIS
literature, e.g., [33], [34]. The small-scale fading on the A–B,
A–S, and R–B links is modeled as Rician with Rician factor
3 dB, whereas the R–S link is modeled as Rayleigh faded.
The A–R link is assumed to be purely line-of-sight. The
large-scale path loss between any two nodes is modeled as
−30 −10α log10(d/d0) dB, where d denotes the inter-node
distance, d0 = 1 m is the reference distance, and α is the
path-loss exponent; specifically, α = 3.6 for the A–B and
A–S links, and α = 2.2 for the A–R, R–S, and R–B links.
Unless stated otherwise, we set mA = mS = 4, mB = 16,
mR = 64, K = 16, mmin = min{mA, mB}, pmax = 10 dBm,
and CAB = 5 nats/s/Hz. The carrier frequency and system
bandwidth are 2 GHz and 20 MHz, respectively, and the
noise power spectral density is −174 dBm/Hz, which yields
σ2
B = σ2
S = σ2 = 10
−174−30
10
× 20 × 106 W. Furthermore, we
set ς2
AB = ς2
RB = 102σ2. The spatial correlation matrices at A,
B, and S follow Hermitian Toeplitz structures corresponding
to uniform linear arrays (ULAs) with exponential correlation
and adjacent-element correlation coefficient 0.5, whereas the
RIS correlation matrix is generated according to [35] with
inter-meta-atom spacing λ/4. To model prior mismatch, we set
bΣA,AS = ΣAS + ς2
A,ASImSmA, bΣS,AS = ΣAS + ς2
S,ASImSmA,
bΣA,RS
=
ΣRS + ς2
A,RSImSmR, and
bΣS,RS
=
ΣRS +
ς2
S,RSImSmR, together with bµA,AS = µAS + ςA,ASrA,AS and
bµS,AS = µAS + ςS,ASrS,AS, where rA,AS, rS,AS ∼CN(0, I).
Unless stated otherwise, the prior-error variances are chosen

8
1
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ρ = 10
ρ = 1
ρ = 0.1
ρ = 0.01
Iteration number
NMSE
Augmented objective: gν,ρ(F, θ, τ)
True objective: ξpred(F, θ)
Fig. 2. Convergence behavior of the proposed AO algorithm.
as ς2
A,AS = ς2
S,AS = 0 and ς2
A,RS = ς2
S,RS = 0 under perfect-
prior assumptions, and as ς2
A,AS = ς2
S,AS = (5 × 105)σ2 and
ς2
A,RS = ς2
S,RS = (5 × 105)σ2 under imperfect-prior assump-
tions. All NMSE results are averaged over 1000 independent
channel realizations.
B. Convergence Results
In Fig. 2, we illustrate the convergence behavior of the
proposed AO framework in Algorithm 1 for the RIS-aided
setting under perfect prior knowledge of the HAS and HRS
links at both A and S. The figure shows that the algorithm
reaches convergence within a limited number of iterations.
Starting from ν = 0 and ρ = 10, the inner AO loop in Algo-
rithm 2 updates (F, θ, τ) for fixed (ν, ρ), thereby yielding a
monotonic increase of the augmented Lagrangian gν,ρ(F, θ, τ)
until convergence of the inner subproblem. Subsequently, the
multiplier ν and the penalty parameter ρ are updated according
to Algorithm 1, and the process is repeated. The sharp drops
observed in the augmented objective at the outer iterations
are expected, since the updates of ν and ρ jointly tighten
the enforcement of the equality constraint. More specifically,
reducing ρ strengthens the quadratic penalty component, while
the multiplier update ν ←ν+ 1
ρf(F, θ, CAB, τ) also increases
the influence of the linear dual term associated with the
constraint residual. Consequently, after each outer update,
constraint violations are penalized more aggressively, which
leads to the observed downward jump in the augmented
objective. Moreover, the noticeable mismatch between the
true objective and the augmented objective during the early
iterations indicates that, although the iterates improve the pe-
nalized problem in (20), they are not yet primal-feasible for the
original formulation in (17), i.e., the residual f(F, θ, CAB, τ)
remains nonzero. As the outer loop advances, the joint updates
of ν and ρ drive this residual toward zero, so that the iterates
eventually satisfy the original constraint as well, and the
gap between the augmented and true objectives consequently
vanishes.
C. Impact of the Number of RIS Meta-Atoms
In Fig. 3, we examine the impact of the number of RIS meta-
atoms on the average NMSE at the sensor for four different
prior-knowledge configurations. Here, “Perfect prior” denotes
the case in which both A and S possess correct statistical
priors, “Imperfect prior” corresponds to the case in which both
0 42
82
122
162
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Lines: Analytical
Markers: Simulation
Number of RIS elements (mR)
Average NMSE
Imperfect prior at S
Imperfect prior
Perfect prior
Imperfect prior at A
Fig. 3. Impact of the number of meta-atoms at the RIS on the NMSE at S.
nodes operate with erroneous priors, and “Imperfect prior at A”
(resp. “Imperfect prior at S”) denotes the case in which only A
(resp. S) has imperfect prior knowledge while the other node
has perfect priors. The solid curves are obtained analytically
from the closed-form true Bayesian MSE expression in (11),
evaluated at the optimized design (F, θ) and then normalized
to produce the NMSE, whereas the markers are obtained by
Monte Carlo simulation, where the received signal at S is
generated according to the sensing model, the mismatched
LMMSE estimator in (7)–(8) is applied, and the resulting
channel-estimation error is averaged over random realizations.
It is observed that the analytical curves closely match the
simulation markers for all values of mR, thereby validating the
accuracy of the developed NMSE characterization. Moreover,
the average NMSE increases monotonically with mR in all
four cases, which shows that a larger RIS offers additional
spatial degrees of freedom for shaping the reflected signal over
the A–R–S path and, consequently, for degrading the sensing
capability at S. In particular, the point mR = 0 corresponds
to the non-RIS scenario, and it yields the smallest NMSE in
each prior setting; therefore, the non-RIS case is the least
favorable from the transmitter-privacy perspective. This ob-
servation clearly demonstrates the privacy advantage enabled
by RIS deployment. The figure also reveals a clear ordering
among the four prior settings: the highest NMSE is achieved
when the prior is imperfect at S, followed by the case in which
both A and S have imperfect priors, then the perfect-prior case,
whereas the lowest NMSE is obtained when the prior is imper-
fect only at A. This behavior is physically intuitive. When A
has imperfect priors, it optimizes (F, θ) using a mismatched
predicted objective, so the resulting design is no longer well
aligned with the true channel statistics governing the sensor’s
estimator; as a result, the actual degradation induced at S is
reduced, leading to a lower NMSE. In contrast, when S has
imperfect priors, its Wiener filter is itself mismatched to the
true observation model, which directly deteriorates channel-
estimation accuracy and leads to a larger NMSE. When both
nodes have imperfect priors, these two effects coexist: the
prior mismatch at S still degrades the estimator, whereas the
prior mismatch at A partially weakens the effectiveness of
the privacy-oriented design. Consequently, the corresponding
performance lies between the cases of “Imperfect prior at S”
and “Perfect prior”.

9
4
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Number of transmit antennas (mA)
Average NMSE
w/o RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
Fig. 4. Impact of the number of transmit antennas
on the NMSE at S.
2
3
4
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of sensing antennas (mS)
Average NMSE
w/o RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
Fig. 5. Impact of the number of sensor antennas
on the NMSE at S.
4
8
12
16
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Number of observation slots (K)
Average NMSE
w/o RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
Fig. 6.
Impact of the observation length on the
NMSE at S.
D. Impact of the Number of Transmit Antennas
For the remaining figures, we restrict attention to the case
of imperfect prior at A and consider two representative sub-
cases at S, namely, “perfect prior at S” and “imperfect prior
at S”, since these two settings most clearly reveal the privacy
implications of transmitter-side prior mismatch under different
sensing conditions at the adversarial sensor. In Fig. 4, we in-
vestigate the impact of the number of transmit antennas on the
average NMSE at the sensor for both RIS-aided and non-RIS
architectures. It is observed that the average NMSE increases
monotonically with mA in all four cases. This trend can
be understood from two complementary perspectives. First,
for fixed K and mS, increasing mA enlarges the dimension
of the unknown channel HAS ∈CmS×mA to be estimated,
whereas the size of the observation available at the sensor,
YS
∈CmS×K, remains unchanged. Equivalently, in the
vectorized model, the number of unknown coefficients in hAS
grows with mA, while the number of observation dimensions
remains fixed at KmS. Hence, the estimation problem at S
becomes progressively more challenging as mA increases,
which naturally results in a higher NMSE. Second, a larger
transmit array provides additional spatial degrees of freedom
for the design of the transmit precoder, and, in the RIS-aided
case, these degrees of freedom can be further exploited jointly
with the RIS phase profile to more effectively impair sensing at
S while maintaining the communication requirement at B. This
explains why, for every value of mA, the RIS-aided scheme
consistently outperforms its non-RIS counterpart under the
same prior setting. Moreover, the ordering between the perfect-
prior and imperfect-prior cases at S remains consistent with
that already observed in Fig. 3. Overall, Fig. 4 shows that
increasing the number of transmit antennas is beneficial for
transmitter privacy, and that RIS assistance further amplifies
this gain.
E. Impact of the Number of Sensor Antennas
In Fig. 5, we investigate the impact of the number of
sensor antennas on the average NMSE for both RIS-aided
and non-RIS architectures, while keeping the transmitter-side
prior imperfect and considering the two representative cases of
perfect prior at S and imperfect prior at S. A first noteworthy
observation is that, when S has perfect prior knowledge, the
average NMSE remains nearly unchanged as mS increases.
This behavior can be understood by noting that increasing mS
enlarges not only the observation matrix at the sensor but also
the dimension of the channel HAS ∈CmS×mA to be estimated.
Hence, the sensor acquires a larger spatial observation space,
but it must simultaneously infer a proportionally larger number
of channel coefficients. Since the estimator at S is statistically
matched in the perfect-prior case, these two effects largely
balance each other in normalized terms, and the resulting
average NMSE changes only marginally with mS. In contrast,
when S operates with imperfect prior knowledge, the average
NMSE decreases as mS increases. In this case, the additional
sensing antennas provide a richer spatial observation that par-
tially compensates for the prior mismatch, thereby improving
the conditioning of the estimation problem and reducing the
mismatch-induced error. The figure further shows that, for both
prior settings at S and for all values of mS, the RIS-aided
architecture consistently achieves a higher NMSE than its non-
RIS counterpart. Therefore, although increasing the sensing
capability of the adversarial node can alleviate the impact of
prior mismatch at S, RIS assistance continues to provide a
clear privacy advantage throughout the entire range of mS.
F. Impact of the Observation Length
In Fig. 6, we study the effect of the observation length K
on the average NMSE at the sensor. As expected, the average
NMSE decreases with K for all considered cases. This behav-
ior follows directly from the fact that a larger observation hori-
zon provides the sensor with more temporal samples, thereby
increasing the effective number of measurements available for
channel inference and improving the accuracy of the LMMSE
estimator. In other words, a longer sensing duration reduces
the uncertainty in the channel estimate and strengthens the
sensing capability of the adversarial node. Nevertheless, the
RIS-aided scheme consistently yields a higher NMSE than the
non-RIS scheme for both prior settings at S across the entire
range of K. This is an important observation, since it shows
that the privacy benefit of RIS assistance is not limited to short
observation windows; rather, it persists even when the sensor
is allowed to collect a substantially larger number of samples.
Thus, while increasing K is beneficial for the sensor from an

10
10
15
20
25
30
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Transmit power budget (dBm)
Average NMSE
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (perfect prior at S)
Fig. 7.
Impact of transmit power budget on the
NMSE at S.
1
2
3
4
5
0.4
0.5
0.6
(ς2/σ2) × 105
Average NMSE
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/ RIS (perfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (perfect prior at S)
Fig. 8. Impact of imperfect prior on the NMSE at
S.
16
18
20
22
24
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Transmit power budget (dBm)
AoA estimation RMSE (degree)
w/ RIS (imperfect prior at S)
w/o RIS (imperfect prior at S)
Fig. 9.
Impact of transmit power budget on the
AoA estimation RMSE at S.
estimation standpoint, the proposed RIS-aided design remains
effective in preserving transmitter privacy.
G. Impact of Transmit Power Budget
In Fig. 7, we examine the impact of the transmit power
budget on the average NMSE at the sensor for both RIS-
aided and non-RIS architectures, while restricting attention
to the case of imperfect prior at A and considering the two
representative subcases of perfect prior at S and imperfect
prior at S. It is observed that the average NMSE decreases
monotonically with pmax in all four cases. Although a larger
power budget gives A greater flexibility to design (F, θ)
in a privacy-aware manner, the dominant effect is that the
received observation at S becomes stronger as pmax increases.
More specifically, the same transmit signal X simultaneously
drives both the desired sensing component HASX and the
RIS-induced nuisance component HRSΘHARX. Hence, in-
creasing pmax does not merely intensify interference at S;
it also strengthens the direct A–S observation from which S
estimates the channel. Since the cascaded RIS term constitutes
a structured impairment rather than an independently powered
jammer, the net effect of increasing pmax is an improvement
in the effective observation quality at S, which leads to a
lower NMSE. Nevertheless, for every value of pmax, the
RIS-aided scheme consistently yields a higher NMSE than
the corresponding non-RIS benchmark under the same prior
setting. This shows that, although a larger transmit power
budget improves the sensing capability of the adversarial node,
RIS-assisted propagation shaping continues to preserve a non-
negligible privacy advantage across the entire operating range.
H. Impact of the Imperfect Priors
In Fig. 8, we investigate the impact of the prior-error
variance on the average NMSE at the sensor for both RIS-
aided and non-RIS architectures, while restricting attention
to the case of imperfect prior at A and considering the two
representative subcases of perfect prior at S and imperfect
prior at S. Here, whenever prior mismatch is present, the
corresponding prior-error variances are set equal to a common
value ς2. A clear contrast is observed between the two sensing
conditions at S. When S has perfect prior knowledge, the
average NMSE decreases as ς2 increases. This behavior is
physically intuitive, since a larger prior mismatch at A makes
the design of (F, θ) increasingly driven by an inaccurate
predicted objective. As a result, the resulting privacy-oriented
design becomes less aligned with the true channel statistics
governing the sensor’s estimator, so that the actual impairment
induced at S is weakened and the sensor can estimate the
channel more accurately, thereby reducing the NMSE. In
contrast, when S also operates with imperfect prior knowledge,
the average NMSE increases monotonically with ς2. In this
case, increasing ς2 not only preserves the transmitter-side
design mismatch, but also directly worsens the mismatch in
the Wiener filter employed at S, and this estimator mismatch
becomes the dominant effect, leading to a larger NMSE. The
figure further shows that, for every value of ς2 and under
both prior settings at S, the RIS-aided architecture consistently
achieves a higher NMSE than its non-RIS counterpart. There-
fore, although severe transmitter-side prior mismatch can par-
tially reduce the effectiveness of the privacy-oriented design,
RIS assistance continues to provide a clear privacy advantage,
and this advantage becomes particularly pronounced when the
sensor itself also suffers from prior mismatch.
I. AoA Privacy Interpretation
To connect transmitter privacy to a more direct sensing
metric, we next evaluate the AoA estimation performance
at the malicious sensor using the estimated channel bHAS,
via a Bartlett spatial-spectrum search over candidate angles.
We restrict attention here to the case of imperfect prior
at S, since when S has perfect prior knowledge, the prior
mean may already contain deterministic transmitter-direction
information, and therefore AoA estimation from bHAS is no
longer a meaningful privacy indicator. Fig. 9 shows that the
root mean square error (RMSE) of AoA estimation decreases
with the transmit-power budget for both the RIS-aided and
non-RIS schemes, which is consistent with the trend already
observed in Fig. 7 for the channel-estimation NMSE, i.e., as
pmax increases, the observation quality at S improves, and
the resulting estimate of HAS becomes more accurate. Nev-
ertheless, the RIS-aided scheme consistently yields a higher
AoA RMSE than the non-RIS benchmark over the entire range
of pmax. This observation is important because it shows that
the privacy benefit of the proposed design is not limited to
the intermediate channel-estimation metric, but also translates

11
into degraded inference of a physically meaningful transmitter
attribute, namely, its angle of arrival at the sensor. Therefore,
RIS-assisted propagation shaping helps preserve transmitter
privacy not only in terms of channel-estimation error, but
also in terms of the AoA estimation accuracy achieved at the
sensor.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper studied transmitter privacy in an RIS-aided
multi-antenna wireless system in the presence of a mali-
cious sensing node seeking to estimate the transmitter–sensor
channel. A privacy-oriented joint optimization framework was
developed for the transmit precoder and RIS reflection coeffi-
cients, with the aim of maximizing the malicious sensor’s pre-
dicted channel-estimation error while guaranteeing the desired
communication performance at the legitimate receiver under
power and RIS constraints. To tackle the resulting non-convex
problem, an AO-based method was proposed. The numerical
results showed that RIS-assisted propagation shaping can sig-
nificantly impair unauthorized channel estimation and provide
clear privacy gains relative to non-RIS benchmarks, without
sacrificing reliable communication. They further showed that
these gains are also reflected in degraded AoA estimation at
the malicious sensor, thereby providing a more direct sensing-
level interpretation of transmitter privacy.
An important direction for future work is to extend the
proposed framework to multi-user scenarios with multiple
legitimate receivers and multiple possibly colluding mali-
cious sensors, where spatially distributed attackers may share
observations and/or local channel estimates, leading to a
richer joint estimation model and potentially different privacy–
communication tradeoffs.