Adversarial Malware Generation in Linux ELF Binaries via
Semantic-Preserving Transformations
Luk´aˇs Hrdonka1, Martin Jureˇcek1
a
1Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, Th´akurova 9, Prague, Czech Republic
{hrdonluk, martin.jurecek}@fit.cvut.cz
Keywords:
adversarial attacks, adversarial malware, machine learning, ELF, Linux.
Abstract:
Malware development and detection have undergone significant changes in recent years as modern concepts,
such as machine learning, have been used for both adversarial attacks and defense. Despite intensive research
on Windows Portable Executable (PE) files, there is minimal work on Linux Executable and Linkable Format
(ELF). In this work, we summarize the academic papers submitted in this field and develop a new adversarial
malware generator for the ELF format. Using a variety of metrics, we thoroughly evaluated our generator
and achieved an Evasion Rate of 67.74 % while changing the confidence of the malware detector by −0.50
in the mean case for the dataset used. In our approach, we chose MalConv as the target classifier. Using this
classifier, we found that the most successful modifications used strings typical of benign files as a data source.
We conducted a variety of experiments and concluded that the target classifier appears sensitive to strings at
any location within the executable file.
1
INTRODUCTION
IT
security
specialists,
including
academic
re-
searchers and industry professionals, have been bat-
tling against malware for decades. Over this time, the
methods of malware deployment have evolved sig-
nificantly (Cozzi et al., 2018). As a result, antimal-
ware solutions must be continuously updated to keep
pace with these advancements and effectively detect
emerging threats.
Within the scope of this discussion, our primary
focus will be on the generation of adversarial mal-
ware samples. In this context, attackers modify bi-
naries to create new versions that retain the original
functionality but are designed to evade detection by
the target model, leading to misclassification. This
technique represents a growing challenge in the cy-
bersecurity landscape, as it can undermine the effec-
tiveness of defense mechanisms that rely on machine
learning models for threat detection. However, cre-
ating perturbations in malware binaries is a complex
task because even minor modifications to the binary
code can make the executable non-functional or lead
to undefined behavior (Kreuk et al., 2018).
An adversarial malware generator operates under
a key restrictive condition: the program’s functional-
a
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6546-8953
ity must remain unchanged. Additionally, there is the
optimization to consider: the goal is to maximize the
probability that the manipulated malware is misclas-
sified as a benign file by the target detection model.
To the best of our knowledge, there is a larger
number of academic papers regarding adversarial
malware creation for the Windows platform (PE file
format), while only a few works focus on the Linux
ELF file format. However, with the massive growth
of Linux usage in recent years (especially in high-
performance computing, cloud services, or IoT), the
research needs to investigate the possibilities of ad-
versarial malware for the Linux ELF format. Con-
sequently, this paper will focus mainly on the Linux
ELF file format.
The main contribution of this paper is the de-
sign of an adversarial malware generator targeting the
ELF file format.
Our approach is based on a ge-
netic algorithm workflow that explores the modifi-
cation space using 12 modification types and 7 data
sources, increasing the diversity and effectiveness of
generated samples. The work also addresses inter-
pretability limitations of machine learning based de-
tection through advanced logging that provides in-
sight into the generation process. In addition, we pro-
pose evaluation metrics for adversarial generators that
extend the basic evasion rate and enable a more com-
prehensive assessment of performance.
arXiv:2604.22639v1 [cs.CR] 24 Apr 2026

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Re-
lated work done in adversarial attacks is discussed in
Section 2. Section 3 then presents the methodology
and metrics used in the experiments. The proposed
generator is then described in Section 4. Section 5
presents the environment used for the experiments,
whose results are then described and discussed in Sec-
tion 6. At the end of the article, we outline our future
work and conclude (Section 7).
2
RELATED WORK
Despite our focus on ELF binaries, we first highlight
a few works done in the field of PE files as the re-
search dominates for these. In (Koz´ak et al., 2024),
the authors presented a black-box evasion attack us-
ing reinforcement learning algorithms. They defined
ten modification types, including appending random
benign content to the end of the file or to newly cre-
ated sections, removing the digital certificates infor-
mation, or increasing the timestamp. They reported
an Evasion Rate of 53.84 % against the GBDT clas-
sifier, 11.41 % against MalConv, and an average Eva-
sion Rate of 2.31 % against leading antivirus engines.
The work of (Lucas et al., 2021) presented a
method of raw byte modification of PE files. They
defined two families of transformation types – in-
place randomization (e.g., replacing instructions with
their equivalent ones of the same length, or reassign-
ing the registers within the same functions) and code
displacement (the original code is altered with the
jmp instruction that passes control to the displaced
code). They achieved evasion success rates up to 85 %
against commercial anti-viruses.
The authors of (Quertier et al., 2022) presented
MERLIN – Malware Evasion with Reinforcement
LearnING. They defined 16 modification types of PE
files, including adding of benign strings to the end
of sections, adding import functions, or packing and
unpacking the malicious file. Against MalConv, they
achieved an almost 100 % Evasion Rate, mainly be-
cause they discovered that the action type called add
section strings has a high cumulative score. They pre-
sented an Evasion Rate of 80 % against EMBER, and
70 % using a commercial antivirus.
In (Song et al., 2022), the authors modeled the
action selection problem using the multi-armed ban-
dit (MAB) problem and developed MAB-Malware,
which consists of two main modules – Binary
Rewriter and Action Minimizer. In Binary Rewriter,
they defined eight macro-actions, including append-
ing benign content at the end of the binary, adding
random bytes to the unused space at the end of the
section, or zeroing out several fields from PE files.
They also implemented micro-actions, which follow
some of the principles used in macro-actions but mod-
ify only a few bytes. Using Action Minimizer, they
then remove unnecessary actions and replace macro-
actions with micro-actions to produce a sample with
only minimal changes to the binary. They presented
an Evasion Rate of 74.7 % using EMBER classifier,
97.72 % using MalConv, and 31.99–48.3 % using the
top 3 antivirus software.
In (Anderson et al., 2018), OpenAI Gym code
called gym-malware was released. The authors de-
fined several manipulation types, such as adding a
function to the Import Address Table that is never
used, changing existing section names, or removing
signer information. They also trained their own gra-
dient boosted decision model, and presented an Eva-
sion Rate of 24 % against that model. Moreover, gym-
malware was compared with MAB-malware in (Song
et al., 2022). The work concluded that gym-malware
achieved an Evasion Rate of 32.5 % against MalConv
and 15 % against EMBER.
While moving towards ELF file format, the au-
thors of (Xue et al., 2024) defined four major types
of ELF modification methods – add redundant data
to the end of a binary file, modify the sections, add
file import information, and encapsulate a file (the file
content is converted into data part of Go code). They
achieved a detection rate of 25 % for ClamAV and an
Evasion Rate of 75.8 % against VirusTotal1.
The authors of (Kosikowski et al., 2023) devel-
oped a tool to modify ELF binary files using deep
learning algorithms. They used several types of ELF
alternations, including Header Alternation, Debug Al-
ternation, Padding Alternation, or Dynamic Exten-
sion. They reported an Evasion Rate of 76.6 % against
FireEyeNet and 8.4 % against MalConv.
In (Ravi et al., 2025), the authors developed the
tool called ADVeRL-ELF to generate adversarial ELF
malware using reinforcement learning.
They used
ResNet18, an 18-layer CNN (Convolutional Neural
Network), as a target classifier. They mainly target
the executable section of ELF files by adding seman-
tic NOPs (no-operation instructions).
They evalu-
ated their tool using the IoT malware dataset (bina-
ries compiled for the ARM architecture) and achieved
a success rate of 59.5 %. Still, they noted that their
framework can be easily extended to support the x86-
64 architecture as well.
To the best of our knowledge, these are the few
academic papers that discuss the offensive point of
view of adversarial malware for ELF format. How-
ever, there are other works, such as (Qiao et al., 2023),
1https://www.virustotal.com/

or (Ramamoorthy et al., 2025), focusing primarily on
the defensive aspect of adversarial malware. Further-
more, authors of (Guesmi et al., 2025) focused on the
defense against adversarial malware in lightweight
ELF headers, which are used mainly in IoT.
3
BACKGROUND &
EVALUATION METRICS
At this point, we formally define the problems of gen-
erating adversarial samples and ML-based malware
detection. Our approach, tailored to ELF executable
files, also benefits from the work of (Louth´anov´a
et al., 2024) on PE files. Further in the section, we
use X ∈D to denote a malware from dataset D, which
contains only the files classified with the malware la-
bel by the target classifier.
In our work, we developed the adversarial mal-
ware generator G, which is defined using the formula:
X ′ = G(X ) = X +δ
(1)
where the adversarial perturbation δ is added to the
original file X . The output, X ′, is also ELF file that
must remain unchanged in terms of execution. We
then define an adversarial sample X ′ so that the mal-
ware detector classify X ′ as benign or at least reduce
the confidence in malware label in comparison to X .
To classify the ELF files, ML-based malware de-
tector is used. For the purpose of this article, we rep-
resent this detector as a function:
f(X ) = (L,P)
(2)
where X
represents an ELF binary file, L ∈
{malware,benign} is the output label, and P ∈
[0.5,1.0] is the probability (confidence) of that label
according to detector f.
In our work, we use the following three metrics to
evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed generator.
We note that the first metric is commonly used in this
field, while we developed the other two metrics to un-
cover additional properties of the generator. First, we
use the standard Evasion Rate (ER) defined as:
ER = #misclassified
total
∗100%
(3)
where #misclassified stands for number of misclassi-
fied adversarial files by the target classifier and total
is a total number of files submitted to that classifier
(after discarding files that were already incorrectly
predicted before the actual modification).
Second, we propose an extension to the ER, the
Extended Evasion Rate (EER), defined as:
EERt =
1
|D|
∑
X ′|X ∈D
1{αX ′<t} ∗100%
(4)
for threshold parameter t determining the maximal
confidence included in calculation, indicator function
1, and variable αX ′ defined as a confidence in mal-
ware label, thus calculated using:
αX ′ =
(
P
f(X ′) = (malware,P)
1−P
f(X ′) = (benign,P)
(5)
This metric was designed to better approximate the
distribution of confidence in malware labels across
the whole set. We propose using this metric for dif-
ferent values of the threshold parameter t and plotting
the resulting values to observe the distribution.
Third, we propose the Mean Difference in Con-
fidence (MD) metric to observe how the confidence
in malware label changes between original and adver-
sarial malware samples in the mean case:
MD = 1
|D|
∑
(X ,X ′)|X ∈D
(αX ′ −PX )
(6)
where PX is the confidence in malware label of orig-
inal malware sample X , and αX ′ is computed using
Equation (5).
4
GENERATOR DESCRIPTION
We describe our approach to generating malware sam-
ples in this section. We note that the generator is de-
signed to address interpretability issues in ML algo-
rithms by carefully logging all operations it performs.
Thus, for each input file, three files are produced –
the adversarial file, .log file of all the operations per-
formed (including name of the performed operation,
the label of the input data, the size of the data used,
and the offset to the .data file where the injected con-
tent resides), and the .data file with all the data used.
4.1
Modification Types
We propose 12 modifications to ELF executables that
were designed to preserve the original functionality of
the binaries. These include:
• Add Section. This modification adds a new sec-
tion near the end of the ELF file.
• Modify Padding Between Loadable Segments.
We modify the unused space between loadable
(p type is PT LOAD) segments.

• Extend Padding Between Loadable Segments. We
extend the space between loadable segments to
satisfy the alignment constraints (for loadable
segments, page-size alignment is required (TIS
Committee, 2000)). We use the first suitable non-
zero offset for this modification.
• Rotate Loadable Segments.
We move the first
loadable segment after the last loadable segment.
Second and forthcoming loadable segments are
moved towards the beginning of the file.
• Append Benign to Malware. We append benign
content to the end of the malware executable with-
out altering its structure.
• Append Malware to Benign.
We use a benign
file and append block of binary zeros to meet the
alignment constraints of the malware file, which
is pasted afterward. The relevant fields in the ELF
header are then redirected to the malware part.
• Modify Content of Section. We modify the con-
tent of sections that have no impact on the pro-
gram execution flow. However, these sections can
be used by tools. To prevent these tools from pro-
ducing corrupted outputs we optionally rename
the section.
• Modify Content of .strtab Section. We modify
the static symbols of ELF executable files (sym-
bols in the .symtab section, which are used only
by debuggers or other tools). We aim not only to
add typical benign-file symbol names to malware
files, but also to remove typical malware-file sym-
bol names.
• Unregister Section. We propose removing defini-
tions of sections that are unnecessary for the pro-
gram’s execution flow. Their original content is
then used as a space for adversarial perturbations.
• Remove Section. We also propose removing the
section entirely from the ELF file.
This modi-
fication is tailored only to a selected set of sec-
tions that have no impact on the program’s execu-
tion, and are not part of any loadable segments (to
avoid issues with program loading).
• Change Registers.
In this modification, we in-
terchange the registers with equivalent purposes
within the executable sections of the binary file.
• Change Instructions. We propose interchanging
the instructions with the same logical (or math-
ematical) properties while ensuring the hardware
dependencies also remain unchanged.
4.2
Data Sources
For the mentioned modification types, the critical
question is which data are suitable for these. We use
the following data sources:
• Sequence of Binary Zeros. We propose using a
sequence of 0x00 bytes. Although applying this
sequence is an effective way to remove the origi-
nal content, the presence of it is common in ELF
files (compilers often use it as a padding).
• Random. We propose including Random data in
the adversarial samples. For this data source, we
assume that the content of some parts of executa-
bles may differ significantly, so that the distribu-
tion of exact byte sequences may appear random.
• Static File. Using this data source, the actual path
to the file, whose content will serve as a source
for adversarial perturbations, is expected. We in-
cluded two options in our implementation: rodata
and text. The former contains extracted manual
pages of well-known Linux commands, while the
latter contains their .text sections.
• Extracted Strings. We extract the strings from the
.rodata section of benign and malware files of
the specified directories. We then select only the
benign strings that differ more than the defined
threshold and include them in malware files.
• Extracted Symbols – Dynamic. We extract the
symbols of benign and malware files from the
specified directory. We then select symbols typi-
cal of benign files to include in malware files, and
also symbols typical of malware files to remove
them from these files. This data source is tailored
to the .strtab section only.
• Extracted Symbols – Static. This data source is
also tailored to the .strtab section. However,
no symbols are extracted, hence the data source
expects a static list of symbols to add and remove.
• Benign Executable File. We use this data source
exclusively for the Append Malware to Benign
modification. We enable using of any valid, be-
nign executable. However, we use /usr/bin/xxd
primarily because of its smaller size.
4.3
Generator Workflow
Our approach to generating malware samples is sum-
marized in Algorithm 1 and can be seen as a simpli-
fied genetic algorithm, to some extent (as some of its
components, such as crossover, which can easily pro-
duce corrupted executables, are not included).

Input: generator input = directory of files serving as input to the generator.
Output: generator output = directory of adversarial files.
Parameters: max iterations = upper limit to number of iterative modifications to be applied (default: 2).
enabled modifications iter = list of enabled iterative modifications (default: Add Section,
Modify Padding Between Loadable Segments, Extend Padding Between Loadable
Segments, Rotate Loadable Segments, Append Benign to Malware, Modify Content of
Section, Unregister Section, Remove Section).
enabled modifications single = list of enabled one-time modifications. (default: Modify
Content of .strtab Section, Append Malware to Benign, Change Registers, Change
Instructions).
data sources = list of enabled data sources (default: Sequence of Binary Zeros, Random,
Static File (rodata, text), Extracted Strings, Extracted Symbols – Dynamic, Extracted
Symbols – Static, Benign Executable File).
modification attempts = number of times the modification is applied (default: 10).
top samples = number of files proceeding to the next iteration (default: 3).
target confidence = required confidence in malware label of the output file (default: 0.2).
samples output count = number of adversarial files required as output (default: 1).
foreach input file ∈generator input do
for iteration ∈{0,1,...,max iterations} do
Copy input file to generator temp
foreach file ∈generator temp do
if iteration < max iterations then
modification list = enabled modifications iter
else
modification list = enabled modifications single
end
foreach modification ∈modification list do
foreach data source ∈data sources do
Apply the modification using the data source to the file
(modification attempts)-times.
Select modified file with the lowest confidence in malware label.
Store selected file to iteration best.
Remove other files.
end
end
end
Select the top samples with the lowest confidence in malware label from the iteration best.
Store them to generator temp.
Remove other files from iteration best.
if confidence in malware of adversarial file < target confidence then
break
end
end
Select the samples output count samples with the lowest confidence in malware label from the
generator temp.
Save these files to generator output.
Remove other files from generator temp.
end
Algorithm 1: Proposed Process of Adversarial Malware Generation.
Our generator supports two types of modifica-
tions: iterative (which can be used multiple times,
such as Add Section or Extend Padding Between
Loadable Segments) and one-time (which can be used
only once, such as Change Instructions or Append
Malware to Benign). Whereas the max iterations pa-
rameter limits the number of iterative modifications,
the one-time modifications are applied only in the last

additional iteration.
The data sources are often used so that two ran-
dom numbers are chosen from the defined range, serv-
ing as the offset and size of the data source used for
the adversarial perturbation, to avoid always using the
same data. To limit the consequences of that random-
ization, we decided to apply each modification for the
given data source multiple times and select the sample
with the lowest confidence in the malware label.
5
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Our implementation is written in Python.
For im-
plementation of machine learning algorithms, we use
PyTorch2 package. We also utilize ELFFile3 to read
and parse attributes of the ELF binary file. We use
Keystone-engine4 as an assembly framework, and the
Capstone5 engine as a disassembly framework.
We use the Labeled-Elfs dataset6 containing both
malware and benign samples, which are labeled not
only by package name but also by target architecture,
endianness, ABI, or compiler. However, as the mal-
ware files contain only files compiled for 64-bit x86-
64 architecture, we omit the other architectures from
benign set. We also undersampled the benign class
to create a balanced dataset. The files were split into
training (64 %), validation (16 %), and test (20 %)
sets. Specifically, 882 files (441 malware and 441 be-
nign) form the training set, 220 (110 malware and 110
benign) form the validation set, and 160 malware files
form the testing set (we do not include the benign files
in the test set).
To classify ELF executable files, we utilize Mal-
Conv (Raff et al., 2017), a widely used CNN-based
classifier. We use the MalConv-PyTorch implemen-
tation7, which provides effective parallel execution
on a GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) using CUDA
(Compute Unified Device Architecture). To prepare
MalConv to classify unknown files, we train it for
5 epochs. In each epoch, we use the cross-entropy
loss function and the Adam (Adaptive Moment Esti-
mation) optimizer for learning.
At the end of the training, we achieved an accu-
racy of 99.54 % on the validation set. For test set,
96.87 % samples was successfully detected as mal-
ware. Additionally, 90.62 % of the test set samples
2https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/stable/index.html
3https://pypi.org/project/elffile/
4https://pypi.org/project/keystone-engine/
5https://pypi.org/project/capstone/
6https://github.com/nimrodpar/Labeled-Elfs
7https://github.com/Alexander-H-Liu/
MalConv-Pytorch
were labeled as malware with confidence higher than
0.80, and 84.38 % of the samples with confidence
higher than 0.90.
6
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
First, we evaluated the effectiveness of the proposed
generator using all the modification types and data
sources presented in Section 4. More precisely, we
use the default values as described in Algorithm 1.
Using this setup, we achieved the ER of 67.74 %
and changed the confidence in the malware label by
−0.5006 in the mean case. We also calculated the
EER metric for threshold values between 0.00 and
1.00 with a step size of 0.01. The output is presented
in Figure 1 alongside the distribution of confidence in
the malware label of the original samples.
We then analyzed the .log files and found that
only four modification types account for the major-
ity of operations. Namely, Extend Padding Between
Loadable Segments (34.61 %), Modify Content of
.strtab Section (28.16 %), Add Section (16.23 %)
and Append Benign to Malware (15.99 %), were
used. We also found that Extracted Strings is used
almost exclusively for modifications that do not re-
quire the more tailored data source. For the data in the
.strtab section, Extracted Symbols – Dynamic was
used in the majority of modifications. Based on these
observations, we decided to experiment with modifi-
cation types and data sources in further experiments.
In Experiment 2, we decided to limit the list of en-
abled modifications while keeping all the data sources
enabled. We effectively divide modification types into
five groups based on the operations they perform. The
precise division is presented in Table 1 and can also
be seen as a division based on the riskiness of the pro-
posed modifications. Generator 2.1 is considered the
safest because it does not alter any ELF structures. In
Generators 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4, the risk of unintention-
ally affecting the program flow is slightly higher. The
Generator 2.5 then uses modifications of executable
code, which is considered the highest risk, despite our
aim to optimize the modifications so that they do not
affect executability.
Using this setup, we observe the highest EER for
Generator 2.4, but Generators 2.2 and 2.1 provide out-
puts comparable to the best-performing generator. On
the other hand, Generators 2.3 and 2.5 do not achieve
any substantive success, as shown in Figure 2.
In Experiment 3, we decided to limit the data
sources used in the particular generators. In Gener-
ators 3.1 and 3.2, we enable all the data sources that
extract data from malware and benign files. While

Table 1: Experiment 2 – Enabled Modification Types in Different Generators.
Generator
Enabled modification types
Generator 2.1
Modify Padding Between Loadable Segments, Append Benign to Malware
Generator 2.2
Extend Padding Between Loadable Segments, Rotate Loadable Segments
Generator 2.3
Append Malware to Benign
Generator 2.4
Add Section, Modify Content of Section, Unregister Section, Remove Section,
Modify Content of .strtab Section
Generator 2.5
Change Registers, Change Instructions
Table 2: Experiment 3 – Enabled Data Sources in Different Generators.
Generator
Enabled data sources
Generator 3.1
Extracted Strings (included in the training set), Extracted Symbols – Dynamic
(included in the training set), Benign Executable File
Generator 3.2
Extracted Strings (not included in the training set), Extracted Symbols – Dynamic
(not included in the training set), Benign Executable File
Generator 3.3
Static File (rodata), Extracted Symbols – Static, Benign Executable File
Generator 3.4
Static File (text), Extracted Symbols – Static, Benign Executable File
Generator 3.5
Random, Benign Executable File
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Threshold Parameter (t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Extended Evasion Rate
Dependency of Extended Evasion Rate on Threshold Parameter
Evasion Rate
Original
Generator 1
Figure 1: Experiment 1 – Dependency of Extended Evasion
Rate on Threshold Parameter. The blue line (Original) rep-
resents the malware samples before modifications are ap-
plied, whereas the orange line (Generator 1) represents the
Extended Evasion Rate of the adversarial samples.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Threshold Parameter (t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Extended Evasion Rate
Dependency of Extended Evasion Rate on Threshold Parameter
Evasion Rate
Original
Generator 2.1
Generator 2.2
Generator 2.3
Generator 2.4
Generator 2.5
Figure 2: Experiment 2 – Dependency of Extended Evasion
Rate on Threshold Parameter.
Generator 3.1 extracts data from the files used in the
training set, Generator 3.2 uses benign files not in-
cluded in the training set and malware files intended
for modification. For Generators 3.3 and 3.4, only
data prepared in advance is used. The only differ-
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Threshold Parameter (t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Extended Evasion Rate
Dependency of Extended Evasion Rate on Threshold Parameter
Evasion Rate
Original
Generator 3.1
Generator 3.2
Generator 3.3
Generator 3.4
Generator 3.5
Figure 3: Experiment 3 – Dependency of Extended Evasion
Rate on Threshold Parameter.
ence between Generators 3.3 and 3.4 is the Static File
data source (while Generator 3.3 uses manual pages
of well-known Linux commands, Generator 3.4 uses
extracted .text sections of the same commands).
The Generator 3.5 then uses mainly the Random data
source. The precise set of enabled data sources in the
particular generators is presented in Table 2.
Using this setup, we observe the highest EER for
Generator 3.2, but Generator 3.1 remains compara-
ble. Worse properties are then shown for Generator
3.3, which uses the contents of manual pages as pri-
mary data source. Moreover, Generators 3.4 and 3.5
achieve no substantive success as shown in Figure 3.
We also present Table 3, which compares the cal-
culated Evasion Rate and Mean Difference in Confi-
dence metrics for all the generators examined in this
section. We conclude that the target classifier appears
sensitive to string-based data sources but does not
depend heavily on their position in the executables.
However, we based our observations on the dataset
that is smaller than the ones usually found in PE files.

Table 3: Comparison of All the Generators Presented.
Generator
ER
MD
Generator 1
67.74 %
−0.5006
Generator 2.1
49.68 %
−0.4004
Generator 2.2
54.84 %
−0.4182
Generator 2.3
1.29 %
−0.0092
Generator 2.4
64.52 %
−0.4621
Generator 2.5
0.00 %
−0.0014
Generator 3.1
67.74 %
−0.4926
Generator 3.2
67.10 %
−0.5216
Generator 3.3
14.19 %
−0.1826
Generator 3.4
3.87 %
−0.0549
Generator 3.5
3.87 %
−0.0571
7
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE
WORK
This study has examined the current landscape of ad-
versarial malware generation, with focus on ELF file
format. In our work, we developed a generator of ad-
versarial malware files for ELF file format. Our work-
flow is based on the genetic algorithm and accommo-
dates 12 modification types and 7 data sources. More-
over, we aim to address interpretability issues of ML-
based algorithm using advanced logging.
We conducted a variety of experiments to observe
the properties of our generator. We concluded that our
generator achieved the Evasion Rate of 67.74 % and
Mean Difference in Confidence of −0.50 when all
the modification types and data sources were enabled.
We also found that only two data sources and four
modification types are used in the majority of opera-
tions. Based on that, we decided to experiment with
enabling only subsets of modification types and data
sources to evaluate the generator thoroughly. We di-
vided the modification into five groups and concluded
that three of the five groups produce comparable re-
sults. In a further experiment, we limited the data
sources. We found that the string-based data sources
were the most successful, and that the generator per-
formed worse when other data sources were used. We
concluded that the target classifier, MalConv, appears
extremely sensitive to strings at any position in the
executable file.
In future work, we will continue developing our
generator to achieve a higher Evasion Rate within
a reasonable amount of time needed for the actual
generation of adversarial malware samples. We will
aim to extend our generator to accommodate binaries
compiled for the ARM architecture, which is primar-
ily used in IoT. We will dive deeper into execution
testing and, consequently, extract more data for dy-
namic analysis. We will also work on the defensive
strategies to strengthen the classifiers.