“We are currently clean on OPSEC”:
Why JD Can’t Encrypt
Maurice Chiodo1, Toni Erskine2, Dennis Müller3, and James G. Wright4
1 Centre for the Study of Existential Risk, University of Cambridge, 16 Mill Lane,
Cambridge, CB2 1SB, United Kingdom. mcc56@cam.ac.uk (corresponding author)
2 Department of International Relations, The Australian National University, 130
Garran Road, Acton, ACT, 2601, Australia. toni.erskine@anu.edu.au
3 Institute of Mathematics Education, University of Cologne, Herbert-Lewin-Str. 10,
50931 Cologne, Germany. dennis.mueller@uni-koeln.de
4 School of Computing & Communications, Lancaster University Leipzig, Strohsack
Passage, Nikolaistrasse 10, 04109 Leipzig, Germany. j.wright18@lancaster.ac.uk
April 22, 2026
Abstract. We analyse the 2025 Signalgate leak of sensitive US military
information by the Trump administration, addressing why confidential-
ity was violated (messages leaked to the press) in spite of encryption
(Signal), to deepen the socio-technical considerations when designing
and deploying encryption. First, we use π-calculus to formally model the
boutique secure facility setup requested by the US Defence Secretary to
prove that a leak would not be prevented. We then examine how using
a secure channel might still not give overall information security, as, in
this case, power imbalances between personnel and officials led to the ap-
plication of cryptography that compromised their operational security.
We look at how cryptographic tools may have instilled a false sense of
security, and led officials to “overshare”. We then apply this analysis to
the Trump administration’s general desire to burn through political, le-
gal, and now technical process, and demonstrate geopolitical harms that
may arise from such ineffective use of cryptography in a brief use case.
We conclude that, even with advancements in usability of cryptographic
tools, genuine message security is still out of reach of the “average user”.
Keywords: Signalgate, applied pi-calculus, cryptography, SCIF
1
Introduction
1.1
Framing of the problem: why JD can’t encrypt
This paper explores the 2025 “Signalgate” data leak[15]. It aims to explain why
and how, despite the presence of a usable, mathematically secure, encrypted chat
app, a conversation between high-ranking US officials as far up as Vice President
JD Vance still ended up on the front page of The New York Times[28].
Our approach is motivated by the 1999 seminal paper “Why Johnny can’t
encrypt”[39], whose socio-technical analysis showed why the average user strug-
gled with early cryptographic software. Implementations often required knowl-
edge about the management of cryptographic keys, overloading the average user.
arXiv:2604.19711v1 [cs.CR] 21 Apr 2026

2
M. Chiodo et al.
While mathematically secure, they were complex and lacked user-centric design
principles that meant the average user usually undermined the channel’s confi-
dentiality property. In other words: the average “Johnny” could not encrypt.
Now the problem of why Johnny can’t encrypt has been mostly solved; cryp-
tographic tools such as Signal are more user friendly. They are easy to install,
and intuitive to use for most users, without needing expert knowledge. However,
despite this technical progress, there remain socio-technical reasons why the av-
erage user still cannot make encryption “stick”: making use of the tool does not
equate to maintaining confidentiality. In Signalgate, the tool operated as de-
signed: sending messages and inviting new participants to a chat were quick and
frictionless, resulting in a journalist being inadvertently added to a chat group of
government officials including JD Vance. We argue this was a foreseeable over-
sight, and that the state of encrypted communications is still such that reliably
securing messages remains out of reach of most users. In other words: the average
“JD” cannot encrypt sufficiently well to keep messages confidential.
1.2
Summary of they key events in Signalgate
Around 13 March 2025, US National Security advisor Mike Waltz created a
Signal chat group – ‘Houthi PC small group’ – containing 18 high-ranking US
government officials including US Vice President JD Vance and Secretary of
Defense Pete Hegseth[38], but inadvertently added The Atlantic editor Jeffrey
Goldberg. At the time, Hegseth had a SCIF (Sensitive Compartmented Infor-
mation Facility) at his residence; a typical room-sized ‘secure box’ for sending
and receiving secure communications. However, Hegseth had a boutique setup
in his SCIF; a “unique system [...] designed to mirror and access the contents
of the Secretary’s personal cell phone from in his Pentagon office, connecting a
keyboard, mouse, and monitor by cable to his personal cell phone, which was
located outside of his office.”[2, p. 40], as personal phones were forbidden within
it. On 14 March 2025, Hegseth received an email (in his boutique SCIF) detailing
upcoming US air and missile military strikes on Houthi forces in Yemen, to hap-
pen the following day[2, p. i]. On March 15 2025, 2 hours before the strikes were
due to begin, Hegseth posted specific details from the aforementioned email into
the group chat[2, p. i]. On 24 and 26 March 2025, Goldberg published details,
including transcripts, from the group chat in The Atlantic[2, p. i].
1.3
The continued difficulties of encrypting
We argue that secure communication should fulfil the following two notions:
1. Technically secure: The ability of a sender to mathematically prove the
confidentiality of their message when transmitted over an insecure channel
in such a way that no eavesdropper can intercept and read it.
2. Socio-politically secure: The ability of a sender to keep their message off
the front page of The New York Times for at least 2 weeks5 after sending.
5 An arbitrarily-chosen duration, simply to illustrate the point.

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
3
In Signalgate, JD and his colleagues were able to be technically secure, but
not socio-politically secure. And the difference between these is what we analyse.
Lowry et al.[21, p. 16] describe this as the difference between securing data at
rest, and data in transit. But there is more nuance here; Goldberg did not decrypt
data in transit, nor did he reach in to access data at rest in an unauthorised way.
He was simply given the data, albeit through a convoluted sequence of events.
Our analysis is not a direct critique of the Signalgate participants. Rather, it
raises awareness of the continued difficulty for non-technical and non-expert peo-
ple to secure their communications, even with usable, frictionless cryptographic
software. That is: why JD can’t encrypt. Our main message is simple: just be-
cause users can now operate an encrypted chat app and other new technologies,
still does not mean they can understand and control all the surrounding pro-
cesses and circumstances sufficiently well to ensure their communications remain
secure. This persisting lack of knowledge, combined with competing or additional
interests beyond confidentiality, might result in abuse of cryptographic tools that
are outside the scope of their traditional threat models. And the consequences
can be severe if such cryptography is (mis)used in high-stakes scenarios. Thus,
Signalgate is a (telling) example of a wider problem: Johnny may well be able
to encrypt now, but JD still cannot.
1.4
Outline of the paper
Our paper is structured to cover technical, then socio-technical, then geopolitical,
considerations in succession. First, Section 2 provides a formal analysis using π-
calculus of Hegseth’s SCIF setup during Signalgate. Section 3 then proves that
such a setup was never going sufficiently constrain the actions of various actors,
as the infosec the Department of Defense (DoD) had hoped it would. Section 4
builds on these, with the following socio-technical and geopolitical analysis:
Section 4.1 analyses the difference between having secure channels, and over-
all information security. We study several surrounding factors that must be ad-
dressed, beyond the encryption tool itself, to reliably preserve confidentiality.
Viewing SCIF-building as an example of tool integration, Section 4.2 covers po-
tential power imbalances between users, and those carrying out any integration
of such cryptographic tools. We show that user desires and authority can win out
over secure integration practises, leading to insecure processes. Section 4.3 covers
the false sense of security cryptographic tools can give, and how they encourage
users to share more information if they perceive to have a secure system.
Section 4.4 presents the case of political leaders (i.e., the Trump administra-
tion) burning through government technical process with cryptography, to con-
solidate political power. Section 4.5 explores some geopolitical consequences of
sensitive political or military discussions happening in insecure ways and leaking
to adversaries, demonstrating that “unfit encryption” can be devastating both
for users and wider society.
Section 5 concludes that genuine confidentiality remains inaccessible to the
“average user” on their own. And so, for high-stakes communications, encryption
is still insecure without proper assistance and surrounding processes.

4
M. Chiodo et al.
2
Proposed mathematical model of the SCIF
We present here a mathematical description of Hegseth’s SCIF setup given in the
Inspector’s General report[2]. This encapsulates the core knowledge and abilities
of a SCIF operator (SCIF-O) and their subordinates, allowing us to formally
reason about the (non)communication flows between actors in and around the
SCIF. In doing so, we will mathematically show how Hegseth’s boutique SCIF
setup was destined to fail, as the SCIF did not restrict earnest abusive actions.
Practitioners of security formal verification and cryptography “aim at re-
placing the necessity for trusting human behaviour by mathematically enforcing
and disabling specific behaviour that the systems’ designers deem to be (un)-
desirable”[30]. Traditionally one seeks to prevent adversaries from deceiving
honest actors into sending them a secret message or encryption key by reorder-
ing messages. So unaccountability is formulated as repudiating[40] (lying about)
having received a message as a means of furthering the deception needed to be
sent the secret message. However, we take a different approach using applied
π-calculus, which builds upon the tradition (from Bella et al.[4,5]) of seeing how
verified secure protocols can be utilised by abusive actors who have no interest
in deception, but are earnestly & openly undermining the SCIF’s security
properties. It analyses adversaries who utilise cryptography to undermine an au-
thorised centralising actor[30] from being able to know and order events. The
formalism encapsulates who the actors are, what communication channels exist,
which actors have knowledge or visibility of these channels, and how messages
move around the SCIF. This allows us to formally depict what (undesirable)
events can happen in such a setup.
We use the π-calculus process algebra, as it models 1) the concurrent evolution
of states of distributed actors as they transmit messages through the system, and
2) the system’s communication channels used for such messaging. The Appendix
gives a review of the core elements and operations used to model SCIF processes.
2.1
Ordering events in the SCIF
We use applied π-calculus to model the centralisation[30] of all IT communica-
tions in a SCIF, formalising what an actor can know or learn about the com-
munications occurring within it. The goal of the SCIF-O is to ensure that all
IT communications are recorded and that their causal order can be deduced.
We model the record keeping with the abstraction of a vector clock (VC): a
data structure that allows distributed actors to detect causal violations in the
network[34]. We assert for this model that the property of accountability holds
so long as the VC maintains a complete record of all the subordinate clock com-
munications. This accountability property is violated if an unauthenticated actor
communicates with someone in the SCIF, or if there are unauthorised channels
in the SCIF itself. And as this model focuses on how unauthorised channels are
created (rather than the order of unaccountable messages), we are approximat-
ing to a VC (rather than a realtime clock), as we are not modelling Lamport’s
‘Anomlous Behaviour’[19].

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
5
Equation 1 gives the formalised model of a VC. Note that the superscript
variable i represents the immutable nature of an identity clock authorised to be
in the SCIF by the SCIF-O, and trµ,i is the transmission from µ to i.
SO ≡ν VC i
init.cm(VC i
init) | (cc < VC i
α > .IncEle(VC i
α, i).cm(VC i
α))! |
(cm < VC i
m > .(cc(VC i
m) + cs(VC i
m) + cr(VC i
m)))! |
(cs < VC i
o > .IncEle(VC i
o, i).(cm(VC i
o)|tri,µ(VC i
o)))! |
((trµ,i < VC µ
r > |cr(VC i
s).IncEle(VC i
s, i)).MaxVec(VC µ
r , VC i
s).cm(VC i
s))!
(1)
The concurrent processes in Equation 1 can be described, in listed order, as:
1. Intitialisation: This creates the list VC of the number of clocks in the SCIF.
Each list member keeps track of how many events have happened at the
clock with that index, and is sent with every message (see[34] for details).
2. Internal event: This signifies that an intra-actor non-communicative event
that needs to be recorded as having occurred.
3. Memory: Each iteration of this process takes in the current VC list and then
forwards it to the next process that needs the current copy, via either the
channels cc (internal action), cs (transmitting) or cr (receiving).
4. Send: Denotes when VC takes the List (Equation 15) from memory, incre-
ments its index by one, and sends copies of it to the recipient and to memory.
5. Receive: When the List is received, the local VC increments it’s index by
one, compares the two VC lists, and takes the largest value from either list.
2.2
Actors within the SCIF communication system
We now formalise the other actors within and around Hegseth’s SCIF to model
the evolution of their communications during Signalgate, and present the addi-
tional processes that they were required to have to prevent the SCIF-O from
learning and recording communications within the SCIF. Ultimately, these al-
lowed for this distributed system to evolve into the violations of accountability.
These actors include the SCIF operator, the honest actor Alice, JD Vance (JD)
and Pete Hegseth (H ), The Atlantic journalist, and Signal’s recipient discovery
mechanism. From hereon, we say that a SCIF actor is authenticated (abbrevi-
ated auth-n) if they are on the SCIF-O’s list, and if they only communicate via
over authorised channels to other auth-n actors then we say they are auth-z. We
write that an actor is auth-(n/z) if they are both auth-n and auth-z.
SCIF-O: Denoted SO, this is the centralised SCIF process to keep track of all
events, and their order, to ensure accountability. They are just the vector clock.
“Honest Actor” (Alice): Denoted by A, this is an auth-(n/z) actor that the
SCIF-O has prescribed a specific set of channels and other actors they can com-
municate with. They are a VC process, with an additional process that sends
their VC list to the SCIF-O. Equation 2 below gives their full model.

6
M. Chiodo et al.
A ≡ν VC i
init.cm(VC i
init) | (cc < VC i
α > .IncEle(VC i
α, i).cm(VC i
α))! |
(cm < VC i
m > .cuc(VC i
m).(cc(VC i
m) + cs(VC i
m) + cr(VC i
m)))! |
((cs < VC i
o > |ν sm).IncEle(VC i
o, i).(cm(VC i
o)|tri′µ(sm, VC i
o)))! |
((trµ′i < m, VC µ
r > |cr(VC i
s).IncEle(VC i
s, i)).MaxVec(VC µ
r , VC i
s).cm(VC i
s))! |
(cuc < VC i
u > .tri,SCIF−O(VC i
u))!
(2)
where here the additional processes for Alice (on top of the VC processes) are:
– Memory(3): Every VC list update is sent via name cuc to the process for-
warding it to SO (assumes SO can process/receive every event in real time).
– Send(4): Generates a secret message alongside calling the current VC from
memory, before sending them both in polyadic channel tri,µ(sm, VC i
o).
– Receive(5): Alice can now receive a message and list in a polyadic channel.
– Forward to SO(6): Each VC list update is sent to this process and then sent
to SO via name tri,SCIF−O(VC i
u).
This describes the honest actor, who communicates only on authorised channels
and only to authorised actors, records the occurrence of all their communications,
and transmits them to the SO to keep a full record of what was sent and when.
JD Vance and Pete Hegseth: Denoted by JD & H respectively, they are the
model’s adversaries, trying to undermine the accountability property by ensuring
SO does not have a complete set of events, or is unable to determine their causal
order. They achieve this through violations of auth-(n/z). They are an honest
actor (Equation 2), with the additional process abilities given in Equation 3:
B ≡((cs < VC i
o > |ν m).IncEle(VC i
o, i).(cm(VC i
o)|(hs,p(m)))! |
(((hs,p < sm >)|cr(VC i
s).IncEle(VC i
s, i)).MaxVec(VC µ
r , VC i
s).cm(VC i
s))! |
(hs,p < um >)!|(hs,p(ue))!
(3)
This describes the bridge between the adversaries’ SCIF-cleared computer and
their personal Signal app (we infer from[2] that SO is not recording m, which
can be a message or another channel). These three additional processes are:
1. An internal SCIF process generates and sends m out of the SCIF (s →p).
We model the act of sending, but not the content, being added to VC.
2. An internal SCIF process where the SCIF device receives a message from
Signal (p →s), also recorded by the VC.
3. An instance of Signal receiving secrets from the SCIF (hp,s < um >), and
sending messages into the SCIF (hp,s(ue)). Does not send a VC list to SO.

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
7
The Atlantic Journalist: Denoted by U, they have neither auth-(n/z) to
communicate in the SCIF. Their (one) process is given in Equation 4:
U ≡(a < z >)! | (ν x.b(x))!
(4)
This models that U just receives and transmits messages on channels a & b.
They do not have a VC function, as they are outside the SCIF.
Signal: Denoted Sb, this represents Signal’s backend, and models the recipient
discovery mechanism of the application, given in Equation 5:
Sb ≡(sigri,sig < cn, r > .fu(cn, r))! | (fu < cn, r > .sigssig,r(cn))!
(5)
Sb receives channel name cn and intended recipient r, sends it through its back-
end, then sends the new channel name to the recipient (with no VC function).
3
Proofs that the SCIF wouldn’t ensure accountability
Having the SCIF and actors in π-calculus, we show the SCIF’s failure to prevent
message leaks without the SO recording it was a possible system trace,6 with no
security controls against earnest adversaries beyond them acting honestly. That
is, we show that a socio-political leak was a logically-derivable consequence of
Hegseth’s boutique SCIF setup; its architecture could not prevent such a leak.
3.1
Process models of violations of auth-(n/z)
We start by formalising what it means for Vance and Hegseth to violate the ac-
countability processes of the SCIF, by first presenting examples of the processes
that violate auth-(n/z). We then prove that the additional processes needed for
Vance and Hegseth to reduce into these violating processes can be added without
the SO knowing, due to the Signal process’ recipient discovery mechanism.
unauth-z: Let JD & H be made up of the processes described in Equation
3. The accountability property auth-z asserts that all communication between
JD & H must be recorded by SO. Their process take the concurrent form of
Equations 2 and 3, given by:
JD ≡A | B
(6)
and the accountability violating process is given by:
JD|unjd,h < nrms > | unh,jd(nrmr)
H|unh,jd < nrms > | unjd,h(nrmr)
(7)
where nrms is a non-recorded message and un is an unauth-z channel.
6 i.e., with the given SCIF and actor setup, one can deduce a message leak is possible,
even without surprise actions by external actors or malfunctions of the setup itself.

8
M. Chiodo et al.
unauth-n: An auth-n violation occurs when an unauthorised actor can send or
receive messages from inside the SCIF (where channel a isn’t known to SO):
JD | aj,u < nrms >
(8)
3.2
Proving the violations of auth-(n/z)
We now formally prove the violations of the accountability properties auth-(n/z),
as well as why the SO could not fully reconstruct the events.
Proof of violation of auth-z: In Signalgate, JD & H wished to communicate
via a channel SO doesn’t know about (violating auth-z). We prove this is possible
in the boutique SCIF architecture (using the equivalences from the Appendix)
by showing that through Signal, JD can create a new channel name without it
being in a VC list (i.e., without SO learning of it). Line 3 of Equation 3 gives:
(hs,p < um >)! | (hp,s(ue))!
(9)
Rules 7 and 9 from Table 1 can then be used to expand this process to:
(hs,p < um >)! | (hp,s(ue))! | ν un∅
(10)
This then becomes the following context hole:
(hs,p < um >)! | (hp,s(ue))! | ν un[•]
(11)
The context hole can be used to insert Signal (Sb) to generate a name with the
Signal backend process described in Equation 5 as follows:
C0[sigri,sig < un, z >] ≡(hs,p < um >)! | (hp,s(ue))! | ν un sigri,sig < un, z >
(12)
The creation of the unauth-z channel is structurally congruent with the secured
process. That is, we have proven that JD & H can create a communication
channel without SO learning of it, as it does not sit in the VC list □.
Proof of violation of auth-n: We can also formally show that JD can send
and receive messages from inside the SCIF, even without authorisation by SO
(violating auth-n). The proof of auth-n violation follows that of auth-z, the only
difference being that the process from Signal (Equation 5) inserted into the
context hole in Equation 11 is sigri,sig < a, u >; we do not repeat it here □.
A proof of why SO can’t reconstruct events: Our formalised model of
Signalgate has proven that, by design, the SCIF setup could never restrict[30] JD
& H from violating accountability through violations of auth-(n/z). In addition,
we can also model why the Inspector’s General report[2] was unable to reconstruct
the order of events after the fact. The concurrent Signal process also provides a
mechanism for message deletion, S ≡Sb | Sd, given in Equation 13:
Sd ≡unz,h < nrms > .Delete(nrms)|unh,z(nrmr).Delete(nrmr)
(13)

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
9
Here, Delete() erases the record, ensuring that the SO cannot reconstruct the
order of events after the fact. So the property of accountability is lost, as one
cannot guarantee the SO is able to correctly assign blame for misbehaviour[18].
3.3
Undermining accountability
From Section 2.1, honest actors may only communicate when authenticated, and
only on authorised channels (i.e., when they have auth-(n/z)), for the SO to track
all SCIF communications. But in Hegseth’s boutique SCIF, Signal could create
unauthorised (unauth-z) channels between (un)authorised ((un)auth-n) actors.
Section 3.2 formally shows that once the SCIF-Signal tunnel was created, no
security controls remained to prevent or detect Hegseth creating the unauth-z
channel, because of the encryption protecting those communications. Signal’s
own encryption ultimately compromised the security of the SCIF. The SO was
also unable to discover what was said (in technical terms: unable to completely
recover synchronisation of state) because of Signal’s delete function,7 so they
could never know the extent to which the system’s accountability property was
compromised. So the security of the SCIF was compromised by earnest be-
haviour outside the bounds of what is usually considered “abusive” in formal
verification models. Vance and Hegseth neither lied nor deceived, so their be-
haviour was not constrained by the SCIF’s security controls[30].
4
Socio-technical and geopolitical analysis of Signalgate
4.1
The difference between secure channels, and overall security
Those involved in Signalgate successfully set up an encrypted channel, by in-
stalling Signal on their devices, creating a chat group, adding members, and
sending messages in this chat. However, a journalist from The Atlantic was
inadvertently added, who subsequently published their messages. So why did
mastering mathematical encryption (i.e., technical encryption) not translate to
actively mastering meaningful encryption (i.e., socio-political encryption)?
Just because some mathematical encryption process is implemented, does not
imply one has meaningful encryption and overall security.8 Without adequate
surrounding processes which the ‘average user’ may not be aware of, small over-
sights can compromise overall security. The complex maintenance of and dealings
with these surrounding factors appear hidden behind Signal’s ease of use; it is
not something that can be fully coded into a messaging app.9 At present, deal-
ing with all these requires dedicated expertise, including a deep knowledge and
7 Again, more security within Signal led to less security in the SCIF.
8 Consider a hypothetical situation of a user receiving an encrypted file, successfully
decrypting it, and then saving it to a folder on their drive that they had forgotten
(or did not know) automatically synchronises to an unencrypted cloud storage.
9 A month after Signalgate, Mike Waltz was observed reading government messages
on his phone in front of “a room full of reporters” who took pictures[13].

10
M. Chiodo et al.
understanding of cyber- and information security.10 Ensuring securing commu-
nications is not a matter of maximising successes, but of minimising failures.
To stand any chance of using a secure communications tool securely requires
its proper integration11 into the existing infrastructure, as is true of any high-
stakes tool[26]. Simply taking a ‘crypto app’ off the shelf and using it does not
secure communications, even though these systems are now sufficiently user-
friendly that the average user can obtain the software, install it on standard
hardware, and encrypt/decrypt messages reliably (compared to 20 years ago[39]).
These same ‘average users’ are not yet able to secure the environment surround-
ing their encryption software. This includes dealing with issues such as insecure
devices, background software that might cause data leaks, systems being used
in physically insecure locations, and inadequate methods to verify recipients.
So what integration failures occurred with Signalgate? From[2] and public
information sources, we can deduce a few; there may have been more. Section 1.2
covered Hegseth’s boutique setup, and the tunnel which allowed him to exfiltrate
detailed information from the SCFI in almost realtime. But his use of Signal was
what allowed that information to get out of his “circle of trusted people”, and into
The Atlantic. Hegseth was part of a Signal chat group “Houthi PC small group”
‘built’ by Donald Trump’s national security adviser Mike Waltz[20,38]. Waltz
had also (inadvertently) added the editor of The Atlantic, Jeffrey Goldberg,
to the group. How? Back in October 2024, Goldberg had emailed the Trump
campaign team about a story. The team sought help from Waltz to respond,
and so the content of Goldberg’s email (which included his phone number) was
sent by (then) Trump spokesperson Brian Hughes to Waltz. Waltz’s iPhone then
did an automatic “contact suggestion update”, finding Goldberg’s number within
the message and suggesting it as a new number for Hughes (as the sender of the
message), which Waltz accidentally accepted. When Waltz went to add Hughes to
the Signal group in March 2025, he already had Goldberg’s number saved under
Hughes’ name, and that was the number that was added. This group consisted
of “18 Trump officials”, going as high up as the Vice President, JD Vance[38];
unfortunately, none of them seemed to notice that Goldberg had been added,
even though Signal identified him in the group with initials ‘JG’[17].
The integration errors here were manifold[21]. Top-level officials were using
a publicly-available cryptographic tool (Signal) for highly sensitive communica-
tions (military strikes). This software was used on devices with other software
running (iPhone contact suggestions). No checks were done to verify phone num-
bers corresponded to intended recipients (Goldberg’s number saved as Hughes’).
No-one queried all the chat participants (‘JG’ sat in the group for weeks). And
the White House had authorised the use of Signal[20], creating a belief that
it was secure. Indeed, globally other government agencies also “approved” the
use of Signal[35], so much so that high-ranking officials are being targeted for
10 Lowry et al.[21] apply the NIST Cybersecurity Framework to Signalgate, providing
a detailed discussion of knowledge gaps and the necessity of expert advice.
11 The setting up and running of a SCIF is a form of technological integration, and so
SCIF operators are integrators in this process; a role described in detail in[26].

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
11
information through their use of it[10,14]. And while it would be tempting to
dismiss this as a simple case of “the human error of an outside party mistakenly
being added to a message chain”[9], human-machine setups have many different
failure modes, with much more nuance than just “human error”[8]; in reality,
how realistic would it be to expect Waltz to know how to avoid such a mishap?
However, the full extent of the leak was made possible by Hegseth’s request
for a tunnel out of the SCIF, which gave a realtime link to an insecure device,
to which he could (and did) copy sensitive information. We discuss how this
boutique SCIF came about in the next section on power imbalances.
4.2
Power imbalances
Hegseth’s requested tunnel out of the SCIF to his phone created a jump point,
where data first moved from a secure to insecure environment. So how did he
do this? SCIFs are designed to constrain actors, to prevent them doing things
that might lead to a security breach. For this to work, those who design, build,
and run the SCIF – the SCIF operators – must have the authority to create the
SCIF in a certain way, and to encourage (or compel) those within it to behave
in compatible ways. However, this ‘ability to constrain’ breaks down when:
1. The SCIF users have authority over the operators, and
2. The SCIF users exercise that authority to change what the operators are
doing, and/or how those within the SCIF can act.
When exercised, this power imbalance[26] can lead to operators and their
processes being subverted, compromised, or rendered otherwise ineffective. It
doesn’t matter how hard operators try to secure the environment around com-
municating actors, if those actors do not want such restrictions, and moreover
can order them changed or can simply ignore them. As a simple example, those
building cryptographic systems might implement environmental controls to pre-
vent device screenshots when an app is open. But a user may realise screenshots
have been disabled, and deliberately subverts it by pointing an external camera
at the device; something out of control of the system builder. If there are no
override mechanisms in place, they may even be able to re-enable screenshots
in the system settings. Power and influence imbalances may enable users to “go
over” (or around) the desires of the operators, and if they choose to exercise this
power, a well-thought-out secure communications system can be weakened or
compromised[22]. This may happen because the users want to do something the
system does not currently allow, without realising why such actions have been
prohibited. What might initially be perceived as ill-intent, may actually boil
down to a combination of ignorance of the importance and necessity of system
components, and competing interests between their and the operators’ goals.
From Section 3, Signalgate was precipitated by the construction of a boutique
SCIF at Hegseth’s residence: “at the request of the Secretary, the JMA [Junior
military assistant] requested and oversaw the installation of a unique capability
through which the Secretary could access and control his personal cell phone

12
M. Chiodo et al.
from inside his secure office”[2, p. 40] (see Section 1.2 for details). The request
was “consistent with DoD information security requirements, which did not allow
for any cell phones to be brought into the Secretary’s suite”[2, p. 40], but for all
intents and purposes Hegseth had full access to his personal phone from within
the SCIF, via this tunnel. While the phone was not brought in, its functionality
was. Even if the tether console was air-gapped from other SCIF IT, Hegseth
himself acted as a communication bridge over that gap, transcribing information
from classified emails with significant levels of detail[2, pp. 12,22–23]; likely more
than could just be remembered after leaving the SCIF. It can be reasonably
assumed that the JMA understood the dangers of this setup[21, pp. 25–26].
Throughout this process, there was practically nothing constraining Hegseth.
As Secretary of Defense, his JMA was his military subordinate, obliged to follow
his lawful orders. While existing “DoD policy prohibits the use of nonapproved
commercially available messaging applications, such as Signal, for official busi-
ness, with limited exceptions.”[2, p. 3], providing exceptions for this lawfully
rested with Hegseth. The level of classification of the material was a moot point,
as Hegseth had the authority within the DoD to determine classifications, which
only the President could override[2, p. 23]. Yet, the only entity that could con-
strain Hegseth – the White House – had done the exact opposite, having “autho-
rized the use of Signal, largely because there is no alternative platform to text in
real time across different agencies”[20]. That is, there was higher authority, and
motivation, for using Signal in this way. And Hegseth specifically sought this
convenience, arguing “so I could more easily receive non-official communications
during the workday”[2, p. 66]. But why were such sensitive communications sent
in this way? Likely because using Signal had given them a false sense of security.
4.3
False sense of security
The Signalgate participants knew they had an encrypted channel, giving them a
false sense of security. Hegseth even wrote “We are currently clean on OPSEC”
in the chat[2, p. 12]. They then used this to communicate sensitive information.
So, did the introduction of cryptographic tools increase data risks here?
It may be tempting for cryptographers to treat both message quantity and
sensitivity as independent of the existence of cryptographic tools, falsely assum-
ing that communicating parties will send the same messages anyway, regardless
of whether or not they have access to cryptographic tools (so the encrypted chan-
nel can be agnostic to all messages and sessions within). That is: ∂messages
∂crypto
= 0.
Under such a model, cryptographic tools become an unmitigated tool for good;
they add extra security to an existing message stream, and do not introduce
additional risks. Even if the tools fail to secure messages, no additional harm is
done, as the messages would have been sent unencrypted anyway. However, with
increased access to usable cryptographic tools, message quantity and sensitivity
also goes up: ∂messages
∂crypto
> 0. With access to stronger cryptography, people simply
say more. In the knowledge that their messages are securely encrypted, the com-
municating parties feel comfortable increasing the information being transmitted
(discussed in[21, pp. 16–17]), and its level of sensitivity.

Why JD Can’t Encrypt
13
Furthermore, this is not strictly a function of how good the cryptography
is, but rather, how good it is perceived to be; it only takes users to believe that
they are communicating in a secure environment, to tempt them to start over-
sharing information. One sees this in the Babington plot, where Mary Queen of
Scots conspired over “encrypted” letters to have Elizabeth I assassinated; Mary
was caught, and executed[12, pp. 21–22]. Had she not had access to what she
thought was an encrypted communication channel, she may have refrained from
sending messages about the plot; messages that were decrypted and used as
evidence to convict her. And so the relationship is perhaps better described by
∂messages
∂perceived crypto > 0, which can add significant amounts of risk, especially when
the perceived strength of the cryptography is far better than its actual strength.
The Signalgate participants clearly had an inflated sense of security in the
cryptography they were using. After all, it was a piece of software whose Terms
of Service (ToS) opens with “Signal messages and calls cannot be accessed by
us or other third parties because they are always end-to-end encrypted, private,
and secure”[33]. Perhaps their faith in it is unsurprising, and might explain why
Hegseth was sure operational security was maintained[2, p. 12]. They may have
been operating under the assumption that a system which has worked well for
them in the past, will continue to work well in the future, turning a temporary
solution into informal White House policy: “as a temporary solution, the Trump
White House told officials to use Signal as they had done during the transition
instead of regular text-message chains”[20]; giving them confidence from the
highest levels of government. Although some awareness existed that Signal was
not fully secure, as participant Steve Witkoff refused to carry his personal phone
on a trip to Russia (citing security concerns), there appears to have been a
false belief among participants that Signal was at least secure within the US[21,
p. 17]; one sufficiently strong that JD Vance re-entered the chat the day the story
broke[15] to say “This chat’s kinda dead. Anything going on?”[2, p. 51]. A month
later, Waltz was seen reading Signal in front of “a room full of reporters”[13].
The participants may have assumed that Signal securing data in transit ex-
tended to securing data at rest[21, p. 16], even though the ToS explicitly state
“You are responsible for keeping your device and your Signal account safe and
secure”[33]. In a conflation of end-to-end encryption with having control over
endpoints, the existence of unwanted participants was probably unfathomable
to them, even though it was not the first time a journalist entered a secure zone
via fairly elementary means.12 That messages should be erased from all record
via Signal’s auto-delete feature, may have given them further impetus to over-
share with perceived impunity. All the while, Goldberg took screenshots of the
chat, preserving messages that had otherwise been wiped from Hegseth’s phone
when sought by the investigation[2, p. 12]. One wonders why they had so much
faith in a piece of software whose ToS has an extensive disclaimer (in all-caps)
that starts with “YOU USE OUR SERVICES AT YOUR OWN RISK”[33].
12 In 2007, journalists entered the secure “red zone” of the APEC summit. They used
a fake motorcade with Canadian flags. Their ‘security detail’ had ID passes printed
with the words “This is a joke”. And one was dressed as Osama bin Laden[37].

14
M. Chiodo et al.
Ultimately, their faith in the setup’s security led them to overshare so egre-
giously that the New York Post ran with the front page headline “Operation
Overshare”[27]. These messages were extremely sensitive, containing exact de-
tails about the Yemen attack, including the timings of fighter jet strikes and
tomahawk missile launches[2, p. 12], and sent 2 hours before the strikes. We
discuss potential catastrophic consequences of such oversharing in Section 4.5.
4.4
Burning through the technical processes
The Trump administration has always been committed to tearing down and re-
placing existing political structures and practices. Indeed, former White House
Chief Strategist Steven Bannon in 2017 even referred to Trump’s agenda as in-
volving no less than the “deconstruction of the administrative state”[29]. This
has involved burning through the system of internal regulations and external
agreements that Trump has argued is holding the US back politically and eco-
nomically. Such an agenda has become even more overt in his second term.
Domestically, in 2025, the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) was
committed to overhauling the federal civil service. And in terms of its external
relations, the administration has unilaterally withdrawn the US from dozens of
international organisations[6], thereby eschewing multilateralism, international
consensus, and coalition building; contributing to the dismantling of the post-
WWII “rules-based order”[7].
When it comes to established international norms, including those codified
in international law, the Trump administration has distinguished itself by its
willingness to disregard and override them, without the pretense of justification
or excuse. In its interactions with other states, it consistently flouts expectation
and established practice, proceeding according to its own conception of what is
right and required. It has imposed trade tariffs on allies and adversaries alike,
and embarked on military actions in Venezuela and Iran that violate the pro-
hibition on the use of force enshrined in the United Nations (UN) Charter[36],
without explanation.13 Established norms are sidestepped – and even lack tacit