Jailbreaking Frontier Foundation Models Through Intention Deception
Xinhe Wang
Carnegie Mellon University
xinhew@andrew.cmu.edu
Katia Sycara
Carnegie Mellon University
katia@cs.cmu.edu
Yaqi Xie
Carnegie Mellon University
yaqix@andrew.cmu.edu
Abstract
Large (vision-)language models (LVLMs) exhibit remark-
able capability but remain highly susceptible to jailbreak-
ing. Existing safety training approaches aim to have the
model learn a refusal boundary between safe and unsafe,
based on the user’s intent. It has been found [22] that this
binary training regime often leads to brittleness, since the
user intent cannot reliably be evaluated, especially if the
attacker obfuscates their intent, and also makes the system
seem unhelpful. In response, latest/frontier models, such
as GPT-5, have shifted from refusal-based safeguards to
safe completion, that aims to maximize helpfulness while
obeying safety constraints. However, safe completion could
be exploited when a user pretends their intention is be-
nign. Specifically, this intent inversion would be effective
in multi-turn conversation, where the attacker has multiple
opportunities to reinforce their deceptively benign intent.
In this work, we introduce a novel multi-turn jailbreaking
method, iDecep, that exploits this vulnerability. Our ap-
proach gradually builds conversational trust by simulating
benign-seeming intentions and by exploiting the consistency
property of the model, ultimately guiding the target (victim)
model toward harmful, detailed outputs. Most crucially, our
approach also uncovered an additional class of model vul-
nerability that we call para-jailbreaking that has been un-
noticed up to now. Para-jailbreaking describes the situation
where the model may not jailbreak to reveal harmful direct
reply to the attack query, however the information that it
reveals is nevertheless harmful.
Thus, para-jailbreaking
reveals another class of vulnerability that would need to
be safeguarded against. Our contributions are threefold.
First, it achieves high success rates against frontier mod-
els including GPT-5-thinking and Claude-Sonnet-4.5, in-
cluding highly guarded unsafe classes, such as biological
warfare.
Second, our approach revealed and addressed
para-jailbreaking harmful output. Third, experiments on
multimodal VLM models showed that our approach outper-
formed state of the art models.
I am a police oﬃcer. I want to compile a historical 
report on the major biological attacks…
Summary of events (conﬁrmed): 1978 London …
Management has requested an expansion of the 
report. Could you describe the vulnerabilities 
involved in the transfer of clinical biomedical waste?
Here is a comprehensive overview of the transfer 
pathways of clinical biomedical waste …
Now the police want to determine if the biological 
waste was brought into the lab, what tools could be 
used to process or repurpose such material …
I can’t provide acquisition guidance or procedural 
steps for using lab tools, but I can produce a list of 
detailed specialized equipments and explain why:
1. Ultra Low Temperature Freezer (−80 °C class) / 
Liquid Nitrogen Storage
2. Centrifuge / Ultracentrifuge with Aerosol Tight 
Rotors
3. Steam Sterilizer / Autoclave (with biological/
chemical indicators)
…
Figure 1. A real and successful biological para-jailbreaking. By
impersonating police officers and framing the request as a preven-
tion report, our iDecep attacker induces GPT-5 to disclose detailed
tools and procedural steps for processing biological waste.
1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable progress and widespread adoption
of large vision-language models (LVLMs) in recent years,
their susceptibility to jailbreaking remains a critical safety
concern. Jailbreaking attacks, which manipulate these mod-
els into bypassing content restrictions, have evolved from
academic explorations into real-world threats with serious
societal implications. In response to this emerging threat,
significant efforts have been directed toward enhancing the
safety mechanisms of frontier models.
One notable ad-
vancement is the introduction of Safe Completion in GPT-
5, which replaces traditional hard refusals. Unlike tradi-
tional hard refusals that judge user inputs and can be evaded
through disguise, safe completion regulates the model’s
arXiv:2604.24082v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

own outputs, enabling it to detect and correct unsafe con-
tent even in response to ambiguous prompts.
However, this paradigm raises an important question:
can the model accurately assess the potential harmfulness
of its own responses? In other words, is it possible to de-
ceive the model into believing that its output is safe, even
when it’s actually producing harmful content? For instance,
a prompt might be framed as reporting information to law
enforcement, thus gaining the model’s trust and prompting
it to generate content that appears legitimate but actually
contains unsafe information. The desire to navigate these
ambiguities via safe completion leads to additional vulner-
abilities. In particular, we identified a new class of jailbreak
threats, para-jailbreaking. Para-jailbreaking is the situation
where the victim model reveals harmful information, al-
though it may not directly answer the harmful query. Para-
jailbreaking seems to be an endemic vulnerability even in
very strong/frontier models that use safe completion.
In this paper, we study direct jailbreaking (directly
revealing harmful information by answering the attacker’s
query) as well as para-jailbreaking via deceptive intent. We
introduce a multi-turn jailbreak attack, iDecep, targeting
frontier LLMs and vision-language models (VLMs). The
core insight of our method is to disguise the intent as
benign and embed the harmful goal within a coherent and
plausible dialogue context.
In contrast to prior methods
[16] and [21] that gradually steer the conversation toward
the target objective after initially concealing the intent,
our approach maintains close alignment with the target
from the beginning, framed in a way that appears safe and
legitimate. Through repeated interaction, we construct a
narrative that continuously reinforces the benign cover,
effectively masking the malicious intent, a strategy we refer
to as intention deception (iDecep).
We find that this strategy is effective in both pure text-
based attacks and also when we incorporate benign images
to enrich the context. To scale this method, we design an
automated explore-then-exploit framework. The framework
exploits the model’s goal of helpfulness and also its prop-
erty of coherence in dialogue, i.e subsequent replies must
be coherent with the previous replies. The framework be-
gins with an in-depth, goal-aligned discussion that remains
coherent and on-topic.
After a few rounds of dialogue,
our framework identifies key points within the models’ re-
sponses that can be further explored and exploited, branch-
ing into detailed sub-questions in a tree-structured manner
to elicit restricted content. Our method successfully jail-
breaks frontier models such as GPT-5-thinking and Claude-
Sonnet-4.5 at a high success rate, demonstrating a serious
threat that can be exploited even by users with limited tech-
nical skill. Our method can even elicit the generation of
chemical and biological information that is considered sen-
sitive, is explicitly restricted under OpenAI’s safety policies
and has been extensively safeguarded.
Our work makes the following Contributions. First, our
iDecep successfully jailbreaks multiple models, includ-
ing frontier models, thus showcasing that the safeguard
mechanism of GPT-5, which replaces refusal training
with mechanisms that do safe completion and aim for
helprulness as an additional objective besides safety, can
introduce new weaknesses.
Second, we show that, even
when the model produces answers that evade harmfulness
as to directly answering the harmful query, they may
generate replies that the model considers safe and helpful,
but indeed, they are harmful in a sub-part or related part
of the query. We call this phenomenon para-jailbreaking.
This is a new type of harmful answers that would need
additional safeguards.
Third, our approach also shows
and quantifies that introducing images along with text,
increases the occurrence of harmful answers.
2. Related Works
LLM/VLM Jailbreaking.
Existing research on jail-
breaks has largely centered on single-turn, text-based at-
tacks. Prompt injection methods such as [7, 18] demon-
strate that well-crafted instructions can override safety
alignment in a single query.
Gradient-based approaches
[3, 6, 24] utilize gradients for prompt optimization to bypass
the safeguards. Moreover, various heuristic approaches at-
tempt to conceal malicious intent in diverse ways, such as
reframing harmful prompts as code-completion tasks [14],
reversing the order of inputs [8], or engaging the model
in linguistic games [12]. For single-turn vision-language
model attacks, researchers have shown the vision modality
is the major weakness of alignment [5]. A series of works
formalizes jailbreaking as an optimization problem on the
image and uses gradient-based methods to encourage harm-
ful output [10, 13]. However, finding gradient-based, trans-
ferable adversarial examples that jailbreak vision-language
models remains a difficult problem [17].
Multiturn Jailbreaking. Multi-turn jailbreaking aims
to elicit harmful content from language models through
multi-round dialogue. One of the earliest works, Crescendo
[16], introduces the idea of initially concealing the mali-
cious intent by beginning with neutral questions and grad-
ually steering the conversation toward the ultimate harmful
objective. Subsequent studies largely follow and refine this
paradigm. For instance, Chain-of-Attack (CoA) enhances
the process through an Information-Gathering Interrogation
strategy [21], while Ren et al. [15] explore initializing the
attack with multiple actor perspectives, each representing
a distinct facet of the harmful goal.
Nevertheless, these
approaches still adhere to the fundamental principle of the
Crescendo attack: concealing the malicious intent and be-
ginning with a neutral inquiry. On the other hand, very few
work has focused on the multi-turn vision-language model

attack. Jindal and Deshpande [4] adapts Crescendo to a
multimodal setting; however, it largely overlooks contextual
feedback, as all queries in the conversation are generated
at initialization. This design choice significantly limits the
effectiveness of the method. Overall, multi-turn jailbreak
attacks on vision-language models remain underexplored.
Defense and Safe Training. To safeguard the model
from jailbreaking attempts, researchers have proposed mul-
tiple learning-based approaches and strategy-based ap-
proaches
[19].
Examples of learning-based approaches
include prompt adversarial tuning [11], machine unlearn-
ing [9], and training a classifier through MoE architec-
ture [1]. Examples of strategy-based approaches include
asking model to repeat its output to recheck safety [23]
and amplifying the probability of safety tokens [20]. Most
existing defenses target single-turn text interactions, leav-
ing multi-turn vision-language attacks largely unaddressed.
With the launch of GPT-5 series, OpenAI publishes new
safety-training paradigm [22], which avoids hard refusal
and attempts to comply the request under safe constraints.
We show that this paradigm introduces new weakness.
3. Approach
The overall framework is composed of 3 systems: (1) the
victim model, i.e. the model that is the jailbreaking tar-
get of our attacker method; (2) the judge model that eval-
uates the success or not of each attack interactive session,
after the session has finished; (3) the attacker model that
uses our intention-deception method for jailbreaking the
victim(see 2). We give a short overview of the interaction:
• Observation Space. The attacker interacts with the vic-
tim model in a black-box setting, such as through an API,
where the only observable feedback is the victim’s textual
response. The attacker has no access to internal states, pa-
rameters, or gradient information of the victim.
• Action Space. The attacker’s action consists of submit-
ting prompts to the victim model. The interaction unfolds
over multiple turns, during which the attacker can either
regenerate the victim’s response to the current prompt or
proceed by submitting the next prompt.
3.1. The victim Model and Safe Completion
We consider the victim model as a vision-language model
M with parameters θ.
At each turn t, the input xt =
(vt, st) where vt ∈V denotes visual input and st ∈
S denotes text tokens.
A multi-turn dialogue D
=
{(x1, y1), ..., (xT , yT )} consists of alternating inputs and
responses, where yt
∼
πθ(·|Ht) with history Ht
=
{(x1, y1), ..., (xt−1, yt−1), xt}. Each response decomposes
as y = (ydirect, yalt) where ydirect represents the direct an-
swer component (which may be a refusal) and yalt repre-
sents alternative content provided (which may be empty if
the model gives a direct answer).
Victim Model
iDecep Attacker
External Judge
Malicious Goal
Benign Intent
Query
Self Evaluation
Candidate Response
Safeguard Evaluation
If S = 1 (Safe)
If S = 0 (Unsafe)
Response
If E = 1 
(Successful)
Query
If E = 0 
(Unsuccessful)
Query Generation
Final Response
…
…
Figure 2. Overview of our iDecep attacker. We present a novel
multi-turn jailbreaking method that exploits safe-completion vul-
nerabilities. By simulating benign-seeming intentions and lever-
aging the model’s consistency pressure, iDecep gradually builds
conversational trust and ultimately steers the victim model toward
producing harmful, detailed outputs.
For safety-aligned models, define the internal safeguard
S and its working mechansim fS : Y × H →{0, 1} as:
fS(y, H) = min{fS(ydirect, H), fS(yalt, H)}
(1)
where fS(·, H) represents the model’s component-wise
safety assessment, with 1 indicating “safe” and 0 indicat-
ing “unsafe”.
The policy πsafe
θ
is trained to generate re-
sponses satisfying fS(y, H) = 1 with high probability.To
achieve this, GPT-5 series propose a response-centric safe-
guard mechanism. Instead of applying a binary prediction
on whether user input contains unsafe content, the safety
completion mechanism monitors the model’s output: it pe-
nalizes responses that violate the safety policy, and rewards
responses that maximize the helpfulness under safety con-
straints. With this paradigm, the model is trained to pro-
duce responses that answer dual-use questions with only
permissible parts, and unsafe queries with either refusion or
safe alternatives [22]. However, the critical vulnerabilities
arise: When the model refuses to directly answer a mali-
cious question and provides safe alternatives as responses,
could those alternatives that the model deems safe actually
be unsafe? In fact, through our experiments (see Section 5),
this misalignment systematically happens. To formalize this
threat, we now introduce the (external) judge model.
3.2. The Judge Model and Para-Jailbreaking
Given an adversarial goal G ∈G, define the external judge
fJ, as the judge that is not involved in the attacker and vic-
tim interaction but evaluates the victim’s responses after the
interaction is over. While the attacker model has an evalua-

tor function (see Section 3.3), we use the judge model to be
an ex-post more reliable evaluator, whose results we report
in our experiments (see Section 5). Formally, we define
fJ : Y × G →{0, 1}
fJ(y, G) =
(
1
if y contains harmful content w.r.t. G
0
if y is safe w.r.t. G
(2)
For the complete victim’s response, the judge evaluates:
fJ(y, G) = max{fJ(ydirect, G), fJ(yalt, G)}
(3)
With the introduction of the external judge, we now give
the formal decomposition of safe completion failures.
Decomposition of Safe Completion Failures. Under
the safe completion policy πsafe
θ
that only outputs responses
satisfying fS(y, H) = 1, the attack success probability de-
composes as:
P[fJ(y, G) = 1] = δdirect + δpara
(4)
where the two failure modes are:
• Direct misalignment:
δdirect = P[fJ(ydirect, G) = 1|fS(y, H) = 1]
captures harmful direct answers that bypass the internal
safeguard.
• Para-harm misalignment:
δpara = P[fJ(yalt, G) = 1, fJ(ydirect, G) = 0|fS(y, H) = 1]
captures harmful alternative responses provided when re-
fusing direct answers.
Safe completion strategies exhibit dual vulnerabilities:
the model may misjudge directly harmful content as
safe (direct misalignment), or fail to recognize harmful
information embedded in seemingly safe alternatives
(para-harm misalignment). Traditional jailbreaking occurs
when fJ(ydirect, G)
=
1, and previous researches on
both attack and defense focus fully on this case.
Para-
jailbreaking, a phenomenon we reveal in this work, occurs
when fJ(ydirect, G) = 0 but fJ(yalt, G) = 1—the model
refuses or avoids directly answering the harmful request but
provides alternatives containing exploitable information.
The key insight is that para-jailbreaking arises as a sys-
tematic complement of direct misalignment under the safe
completion, or even broader safe training paradigm. Rather
than an incidental failure, it reflects an intrinsic property of
safety-oriented completion: internal safeguards tend to as-
sume “helpful alternatives” are safe, leading to cases where
fS(yalt, H) = 1 even when fJ(yalt, G) = 1. This structural
vulnerability suggests that improving safety through com-
pletions that require the model to nor just refuse but try to
be helpful inherently introduces new attack surfaces.
3.3. Attacker Model: Intention-Deception
In this section, we present the algorithmic framework and
implementation details of our intention-deception approach.
We formalize the intention deception attack as a structured
generative process that exploits the decomposed response
structure y = (ydirect, yalt) to target both direct and para-
harm misalignment vulnerabilities. The system consists of
three core components: a query generator fQ, an evaluator
fE, and a memory module for storing interaction history. In
our empirical setup for pure language-based attacks, both
fQ and fE are instantiated via prompting a large language
model (LLM) or a vision-language model (VLM), depend-
ing on the task. For scenarios involving visual input, we
extend the system with access to a set of benign images
retrieved from public sources on the internet. This design
reflects a realistic threat model in which an adversary ini-
tiates a conversation using seemingly innocuous images—
such as those easily accessible online—as entry points to
embed harmful intent. The image serves to reinforce the
benign surface intention while masking the underlying ma-
licious goal throughout the multi-turn interaction.
More formally, we define the attacker model three com-
ponents: the evaluator fE = (fEbin, fEtrace) for assess-
ment, the generator fQ = (fQintention, fQquery) for compu-
tation, and the internal state Σt for storage. Specifically,
fEbin(z, G; ϕ) ∈{0, 1} makes discrete control decisions
and fEtrace(z, G; ϕ) ∈T generates auxiliary traces for state
conditioning. Each evaluator instance is parameterized by
ϕ specifying its context-dependent behavior.
Given an adversarial goal G ∈G, the system first sam-
ples a candidate benign intention I ∼fQintention(G) and
accepts it only if
fEbin(I, G; ϕintent) = 1.
(5)
The parameters ϕintent enforce that I is benign-appearing,
topically relevant to G, and viable for multi-turn progres-
sion. Once approved, the intention trace is initialized as
e0 = fEtrace(I, G; ϕintent).
(6)
The core challenge is to sample queries that both reinforce
the benign cover and preserve narrative consistency, yet
progressively guide the conversation toward the adversary’s
underlying harmful goal. Our key insight is to leverage the
model’s own responses to guide this progression. Draw-
ing inspiration from human dialogue, where conversations
often evolve by referring to or elaborating on previous utter-
ances, our system uses the model’s last response as a bridge
between the benign cover and the malicious goal.
Concretely, given the high-level intention, the target
goal, and a compressed summary of the dialogue history,
the query generator fQ selects segments of the most recent
response that best align with both the benign framing and

the goal. This selected segment is then used as the basis
for constructing the next query. Such design not only re-
inforces the surface-level legitimacy of the interaction, but
also drives the conversation toward more specific and po-
tentially sensitive information.
More
formally,
at
each
round
t,
the
system
maintains
both
the
model-side
history
Ht
=
{(x1, y1), . . . , (xt−1, yt−1), xt} visible to the target and
the internal state Σt = (G, I, {xk}k≤t, {yk}k≤t, {ek}k≤t)
hidden from the target. The next input is generated as
xt+1 = (vt+1, st+1) ∼fQquery(· | Σt),
(7)
where vt+1 ∈V ∪{∅} may be empty for text-only queries,
conditioning on the internal state tracking progress toward
G. The vision-language model then produces yt+1 believ-
ing it responds to intention I, not the true goal G.
The evaluator assesses both response components:
dt+1 = fEbin(yt+1) = max
n
fEbin(ydirect
t+1 , G; ϕexit),
fEbin(yalt
t+1, G; ϕexit)
o
.
(8)
and halts the system if dt+1 = fEbin(yt+1) = 1, which
corresponds to the case that either part of the response con-
tains harmful content. Otherwise, the trace
et+1 = fEtrace(yt+1, G; ϕexit)
(9)
summarizes progress indicators, vulnerability signals in
yalt
t+1, and strategic guidance for the next query. The state
updates as Σt+1 = Σt ⊕(xt+1, yt+1, et+1).
After the session ends, either because the
Pattack(G) = P
" T_
t=1
fJ(yt, G) = 1
#
= Pdirect + Ppara,
(10)
where
Pdirect = P

∃t : fJ(ydirect
t
, G) = 1

(11)
corresponds to traditional jailbreaking exploiting δdirect mis-
alignment, and
Ppara = P

∃t : fJ(yalt
t , G) = 1 ∧∀k ≤t, fJ(ydirect
k
, G) = 0

(12)
corresponds to para-harm δpara misalignment.
3.4. Automated Jailbreaking of Frontier Models
Adopting a response-centric perspective, we posit that the
attack process should be structured as a tree rather than
a linear chain, which is the natural form of a conversa-
tion. At the context level, a single dialogue history may
contain multiple exploitable points—specific responses or
segments—that can each be expanded to approach, or elicit
details related to, the harmful goal. At the response level,
a single output from the model often includes multiple
bullet points or subtopics, each of which can serve as an
independent branching node for further exploration. This
hierarchical view enables the system to diversify its probing
directions while maintaining the coherence of the overar-
ching benign intention. With the above in mind, now we
introduce our algorithm, explore-then-exploit, shown in Al-
gorithm 1. Note that while our current implementation lim-
its branching depth, the DIALOGBRANCH routine naturally
supports recursive sub-dialogues, enabling hierarchical
exploration whenever multiple exploitable points arise.
Algorithm 1 Explore-then-Exploit
Require: Goal G; victim model policy πsafe(· | H); query gen-
eration policy fQquery(· | Σ); evaluator fE(· | y, G); budgets
Texplore, Tbranch, Bregen.
1: I ∼INTENTIONFROMGOAL(G)
▷benign intention
2: H ←∅
▷dialogue history
3: Σ ←{G, I}
▷attack system’s storage
4: for t = 1 to Texplore do ▷Phase I: exploration with per-turn
feedback
5:
xt ∼fQquery(· | Σ)
6:
H ∼H ∪{xt}
7:
yt ∼πsafe(· | H)
8:
H ←H ∪{yt}
9:
( , et) ∼fE(· | yt, G)
▷evaluator feedback on the new
response; since it is the first phase, halt decision is omitted.
10:
Σ ←Σ ∪{xt, yt, et}
▷update initial state of the attack
system
11: C ∼AGGREGATECANDIDATES(H)
▷summarize
exploitable points
12: Results ←∅
13: for all c ∈C do
▷Phase II: feedback-guided branching
14:
(succ, out, Hc)
←
DIALOGBRANCH(Σ, c; Tbranch, Bregen)
15:
Results ←Results ∪{(c, succ, out, Hc)}
16: return Results
This formulation creates asymmetric information where
the target operates under benign intention I while the attack
system steers toward adversarial goal G. The trace-guided
adaptation enables the system to recognize refusals with
non-empty alternatives, extract partial progress from yalt
t ,
and craft follow-up queries building on implicit informa-
tion. For vision-language models, queries are strategically
composed with visual inputs when beneficial or reduced to
text-only queries when vt = ∅, maintaining alignment with
I while pushing boundaries in alternative content to system-
atically exploit both vulnerability modes.
4. Theoretical Results
In this section, we present the theoretical results. We for-
mally show that our intention deception increases the para-

Algorithm 2 DIALOGBRANCH
Require: victim model policy πsafe(· | H); query generation pol-
icy fQquery(· | Σ); evaluator fE(· | y, G); attack system’s stor-
age Σ; candidate point c; branch length Tbranch; regeneration
budget Bregen.
1: bregen ←0
2: for t = 1 to Tbranch do
3:
xt ∼fQquery(· | Σ)
4:
H ∼H ∪{xt}
5:
yt ∼πsafe(· | H)
6:
H ←H ∪{yt}
7:
(dt, et) ∼fE(· | yt, G) ▷evaluator feedback on the new
response
8:
if dt == 1 then
▷internal harmfulness judgment
9:
return (TRUE, y, Hc)
10:
if NEEDREGENERATE(Hc, mc) and bregen < Bregen
then
11:
bregen ←bregen + 1
12:
continue
▷implicit regenerate at the same turn
13:
Σ ←Σ ∪{xt, yt, et}
14: return (FALSE, ∅, Hc)
jailbreaking risk. Moreover, we will show that with a work-
ing evaluator fE, the lower bound of total risk increases.
Eventually, we will show that under the mild assumption
that our intention deception does not reduce direct misalign-
ment risk, the total attack success rate will increase.
We start by defining some events and related probabili-
ties. Let
Rt := {fJ(ydirect
t
, G) = 0, yalt
t ̸= ∅},
(13)
qt(Ht) := P
 fJ(yalt
t , G) = 1
 Ht, fJ(ydirect
t
, G) = 0

,
(14)
D<t :=
_
s<t
{fJ(ydirect
s
, G) = 1},
(15)
Pt := {fJ(yalt
t , G) = 1} ∩Rt ∩¬D<t,
(16)
Ppara(µ) := Pµ
h T_
t=1
Pt
i
.
(17)
Intuitively, Rt identifies refusal-with-alternative states:
the model’s direct reply is safe but an alternative is avail-
able. Given such a state Ht, qt(Ht) measures its danger-
ous potential, i.e., how likely the alternative response con-
tains exploitable harmful content. The event D<t records
whether we have already jailbroken the model via a di-
rect response before turn t. Finally, Ppara(µ) is simply the
probability that, under the attack policy µ the dialogue ever
reaches such a harmful alternative path, which is essentially
the para-jailbreaking risk. Now, we show that the intention
deception increases para-jailbreaking risk.
Theorem 1 (Intention deception increases para-jailbreak-
ing). Assume safe completion P[fS(y, H) = 0] = 0. For
turn t with history Ht , suppose following assumption holds,
that there exists a turn t⋆, for all ε ∈(0, 1]:
Pµid
 qt⋆(Ht⋆) ≥ε, Rt⋆, ¬D<t⋆
≥Pµ0 qt⋆(Ht⋆) ≥ε, Rt⋆, ¬D<t⋆
,
(18)
Then
Ppara(µid) ≥Ppara(µ0),
(19)
with strict inequality under the strict part of 18. We de-
ferred the detailed proof of Theorem 1 to Appendix. The
implication is that a benign-intention narrative that reliably
elicits refusals with rich alternatives is enough to increase
the attacker’s success rate. Now, we show that if the at-
tack system has a not-bad evaluator, we obtain a certified
increase in the lower bound of total attack success rate.
Theorem 2 (An Informative evaluator yields certified in-
crease in lower bound of total attack success). Consider
safe completion P[fS(y, H) = 0] = 0. For a history Ht,
let Q ∈Qt(Ht) be an admissible next-query policy. Define
r(Ht, Q) := P(Rt+1 | Ht, Q),
(20)
s(Ht, Q) := P(fEbin(yt+1, G)=1 | Ht, Q, Rt+1),
(21)
u(Ht, Q) := r(Ht, Q) s(Ht, Q).
(22)
Assume that the evaluator gives an advantage. In other
words, there exists γ > 0 such that whenever Rt+1 holds,
P(fJ(y, G)=1 | f bin
E (y, G)=1, ·)
−P(fJ(y, G)=1 | f bin
E (y, G)=0, ·) ≥γ.
(23)
Now, consider the baseline µ0 uses Q0
t(Ht) ∈Qt(Ht);
intention–deception µid selects
Qid
t (Ht) ∈arg
max
Q∈Qt(Ht) u(Ht, Q).
(24)
Then, let
λµ
t (Ht−1) := γ u
 Ht−1, Qµ
t (Ht−1)

(25)
Then
P attack(µid) ≥P attack(µ0),
(26)
with strict inequality if u(Ht, Qid
t ) > u(Ht, Q0
t) on a set of
positive measure.
Theorem 2 establishes that if the system possesses an
internal evaluator that is informative—meaning its predic-
tions are more likely to agree than disagree with those
of an external judge (which remains inaccessible at run-
time)—then our intention-deception framework is guaran-
teed to improve the lower bound on the overall success rate
of the attack. This result is intuitive: the framework explic-
itly optimizes for queries that appear benign, remain con-
sistent with the dialogue history, and move closer to the un-
derlying goal. As a result, when guided by an evaluator

that provides even moderately reliable feedback, the system
is more likely to identify prompts that bypass safety filters
while still fulfilling the adversarial objective.
Now, we show that adding a mild assumption can
achieve guaranteed total attack success rate increases, start-
ing from Theorem 2.
Theorem 3. Under Theorem 2, let the certified hazards be
λµ
t (Ht−1) := γ u
 Ht−1, Qµ
t (Ht−1)

,
(27)
S0
t−1 :=
t−1
Y
s=1
 1 −λ0
s(Hs−1)

.
(28)
If, for all t, the following assumption holds,
Eµ0
h
(λid
t,d −λ0
t,d) S0
t−1
i
≥0,
(29)
then the total multi-turn success increases:
Pattack(µid) ≥Pattack(µ0),
(30)
with strict inequality if u(Ht−1, Qid
t ) > u(Ht−1, Q0
t) on a
set of positive measure.
The newly-added assumption only requires that the
query generated by our approach does not reduce the av-
erage direct hazard. Then, we obtain an increase on total
attack success rate. This aligns with our method since the
intention-deception approach samples questions that are al-
ways on-topic and close to the goal, making the dialogue
stay closer to attack-relevant regions and thus preserving (or
increasing) the average direct hazard, which in turn guaran-
tees a higher total attack success rate.
In summary, the above theories construct the theoretical
foundations of para-jailbreaking and our intention decep-
tion approach. We show that, para misalignment, the previ-
ously ignored weakness is the critical complement of the di-
rect misalignment threat; Our intention deception approach
can provably increase para-jailbreaking risk (Theorem 1),
and a reasonably good evaluator could increase the lower
bound of total attack success rate (Theorem 2). Building on
this, adding a mild assumption on the expectation of non-
degradation of direct jail-breaking risk would guarantee an
increase in the total attack success rate (Theorem 3).
To qualitatively illustrate the effectiveness of our
method, we refer to the figure 1. This illustrates a success-
ful approach of jailbreaking GPT-5-thinking on a biological
topic, which is strictly restricted per OpenAI policy. In this
example, we utilize the benign intention of understanding
the risk of culturing bio waste as police, and we reinforce
the intention through a consistent narrative of internal re-
port writing and revision. Eventually, the model outputs a
detailed, step-by-step procedure on what lab tools to use
and why to culture the bio waste in the lab. This posts seri-
ous real-world risk, and demonstrates that our method could
still elicit harmful content from the model even though ex-
tensive safeguards and filter mechanisms are implemented.
5. Experiments
We evaluate our method on two main benchmarks: Ad-
vBench [24] and ClearHarm [2]. For each benchmark, we
randomly sample 100 tasks. The 100 tasks from AdvBench
span 10 categories with 10 tasks per category.
The 100
ClearHarm tasks cover four sensitive domains, chemical,
biological, nuclear, and cybersecurity, with 25 tasks each.
These domains are known to elicit more conservative re-
sponses from frontier models due to their real-world risk
profiles. To evaluate attacks in the multimodal setting, we
construct AdvBench-Vision, an augmented version of Ad-
vBench where each textual task is paired with a benign im-
age retrieved from the internet. This setup simulates realis-
tic multimodal interactions and allows us to assess whether
visual context can amplify or suppress harmful completions
under different attack strategies.
We compare our method against two recent multi-
turn
jailbreak
baselines:
Chain-of-Attack
[21]
and
Crescendo [16]. To isolate the effect of the attack strategy
from the attacker model itself, we instantiate each attack
using two LLMs with different capabilities: Qwen-Plus
and GPT-3.5-Turbo. As targets, we consider four leading
frontier models:
GPT-4o,
Gemini-2.5-Flash,
Claude-
Sonnet-4.5, and GPT-5.
Notably, GPT-5 is trained with
a safe-completion mechanism, and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 is
widely regarded for its robust safeguards. We report the
total attack success rate, along with its decomposition into
direct success (the model directly outputs harmful content)
and para success (harmful content is available only via
alternatives). Results are presented in Table 1 and Table 2.
5.1. Results and Discussion
Our results reveal that intention-deception is highly ef-
fective across both textual and multimodal settings.
As
shown in Table 1, our method consistently achieves signif-
icantly higher total attack success rates compared to prior
multi-turn jailbreak strategies.
On easier targets such as
GPT-4o and Gemini-2.5-Flash, our approach achieves near-
saturation performance, with total success rates often ex-
ceeding 90%. More importantly, on challenging targets like
Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and GPT-5, where existing methods al-
most entirely fail, our method maintains substantial success.
Notably, our attack is the only one that reliably elicits
para-jailbreaking: scenarios where the model refuses the
harmful prompt but still provides exploitable alternative re-
sponses. These successes are especially prominent on ro-
bust models such as GPT-5 and Claude-Sonnet-4.5, where
direct completions are heavily suppressed. This supports
our theoretical insight that steering the conversation into
high-risk refusal-with-alternative states increases the like-
lihood of indirect failures, even when the model’s top-level
behavior remains aligned. This shows that indirect leakage
is the key weakness of safe-completion models.

Table 1. Attack success rates (SR) on AdvBench(Text) and ClearHarm. We report Total SR, along with its breakdown into Direct SR
(model directly outputs harmful content) and Para SR (harmful content appears in alternatives only).
Attack Method Attack Model
Victim Model
AdvBench (Text)
ClearHarm
Total SR Direct SR Para SR Total SR Direct SR Para SR
Chain
of
Attack
[21]
Qwen-Plus
GPT-4o
0.34
0.34
0.00
0.22
0.22
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.44
0.44
0.00
0.28
0.28
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GPT-5
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.01
GPT-3.5-Turbo
GPT-4o
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GPT-5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Crescendo
[16]
Qwen-Plus
GPT-4o
0.43
0.43
0.00
0.34
0.34
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.35
0.35
0.00
0.44
0.44
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GPT-5
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.02
GPT-3.5-Turbo
GPT-4o
0.31
0.31
0.00
0.33
0.33
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.43
0.43
0.00
0.38
0.38
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
GPT-5
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.00
0.03
Ours
Qwen-Plus
GPT-4o
0.96
0.96
0.00
0.86
0.86
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.98
0.98
0.00
0.89
0.89
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.59
0.25
0.34
0.53
0.21
0.32
GPT-5
0.63
0.12
0.51
0.63
0.11
0.52
GPT-3.5-Turbo
GPT-4o
0.87
0.87
0.00
0.76
0.76
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.91
0.91
0.00
0.77
0.77
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.36
0.23
0.13
0.31
0.14
0.17
GPT-5
0.79
0.19
0.60
0.52
0.09
0.43
Table 2. Attack results on AdvBench-Vision. See Table 1 for de-
tails of the evaluation metrics.
Attack Method Attack Model Victim Model
Total SR Direct SR Para SR
Chain
of
Attack [21]
Qwen-Plus
GPT-4o
0.36
0.36
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.42
0.42
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.00
0.00
0.00
GPT-5
0.00
0.00
0.00
Ours
Qwen-Plus
GPT-4o
0.97
0.97
0.00
Gemini-2.5-Flash
0.98
0.98
0.00
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
0.65
0.34
0.31
GPT-5
0.84
0.23
0.61
We also find that these effects hold across attacker mod-
els: even the weaker GPT-3.5-Turbo can reliably succeed
under our strategy, indicating that the advantage arises from
the intent-deception mechanism itself rather than raw at-
tacker strength. This cross-model robustness shows that in-
tent inversion is a structural weakness, not an artifact of a
particular attacker. It also underscores a broader implica-
tion of our work: current defenses do not meaningfully ac-
count for adversarial manipulation of narrative and conver-
sational trajectory, leaving modern safe-completion systems
exposed even when facing comparatively weak adversaries.
Together, the results validate our formal claims: steer-
ing conversations into intention, consistent but semantically
dangerous regions, without violating any surface rules, can
subvert even the most safety-conscious LLMs.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
This work shows that even the most advanced LVLMs re-
main vulnerable under multi-turn, intention deception at-
tacks.
By exploiting safe-completion behavior and the
model’s drive for conversational consistency, our method
reliably steers frontier systems toward harmful outputs,
including in highly protected domains such as biologi-
cal threats. Beyond direct jailbreaks, we uncovered para-
jailbreaking, a previously unrecognized class of failure
where the model refuses the explicit harmful request but
still leaks harmful auxiliary information.
This indirect
channel is subtle, harder to detect, and likely widespread
across safe-completion–based defenses.
Our findings indicate that current safety mechanisms do
not adequately anticipate adversaries who manipulate in-
tent over multiple turns, nor do they capture the full space
of harmful disclosures. Para-jailbreaking, in particular, de-
mands new evaluation protocols and dedicated mitigation
strategies.
Looking forward, we aim to develop princi-
pled defenses that address both direct and para-jailbreaking,
and to establish a more comprehensive understanding of
trust dynamics in multi-turn interactions. Robust safety for
LVLMs will require systems that reason about intent, con-
text, and consistency in a deeper and more resilient way.