Understanding Secret Leakage Risks in Code LLMs: A Tokenization
Perspective
Meifang Chen†, Zhe Yang‡, Huang Nianchen§,
Yizhan Huang†*, Yichen Li†, Zihan Li¶, and Michael R. Lyu†
†The Chinese University of Hong Kong
‡Nanyang Technological University
§University of Southern California
¶Fudan University
yzhuang22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Code secrets are sensitive assets for software
developers, and their leakage poses significant
cybersecurity risks. While the rapid develop-
ment of AI code assistants powered by Code
Large Language Models (CLLMs), CLLMs
are shown to inadvertently leak such secrets
due to a notorious memorization phenomenon.
This study first reveals that Byte-Pair Encod-
ing (BPE) tokenization leads to unexpected
behavior of secret memorization, which we
term as gibberish bias. Specifically, we iden-
tified that some secrets are among the easiest
for CLLMs to memorize. These secrets yield
high character-level entropy, but low token-
level entropy. Then, this paper supports the
biased claim with numerical data. We iden-
tified that the roots of the bias are the token
distribution shift between the CLLM training
data and the secret data. We further discuss
how gibberish bias manifests under the “larger
vocabulary” trend. To conclude the paper, we
discuss potential mitigation strategies and the
broader implications on current tokenizer de-
sign.
1
Introduction
Code Large Language Models (CLLMs) are re-
shaping how software is built, maintained, and
evolved, introducing AI-driven automation across
every stage of the software development lifecy-
cle. Recent academic advances (Hui et al., 2024;
Hugging Face, 2024; Guo et al., 2024), demon-
strate significant improvements in code genera-
tion, understanding, and reasoning across multiple
programming languages and tasks. These models
have been evaluated on challenging benchmarks
showing state-of-the-art performance in code syn-
thesis, completion, and bug repairs. On the com-
mercial side, tools like Claude Code (Anthropic,
2025), Codex (OpenAI, 2026), and Cursor (Cur-
*Corresponding author.
sor, 2025) have operationalized CLLMs by inte-
grating the technology directly into real-world de-
velopment environments to provide real-time cod-
ing assistance, documentation generation, and au-
tomated testing. Such tools have achieved rapid
market penetration; for instance, Claude Code has
seen swift developer adoption, quickly accumulat-
ing over 111,000 cumulative npm downloads by
early 2026 (Gradually AI, 2026).
However, the broad adoption of CLLMs is in-
creasingly raising concerns in the community.
Code LLMs are shown to have strong capability
of memorization – with proper prompts, they emit
training data verbatim. For instance, CLLMs may
leak documentations, statements, logs, and config-
uration files (Yang et al., 2024a; Wu et al., 2025;
Pearce et al., 2022). CLLMs may even memo-
rize and leak code secrets. These secrets include
API keys to online services, private keys, pass-
words, and URLs, posing severe security and pri-
vacy risks. The secrets appear in training corpus,
since careless programmers push their secrets to
code hosting services like GitHub. Therefore, with
the exploding use of CLLMs, the topic is becom-
ing important in the AI safety community. We il-
lustrate the risk in Fig. 1.
While most memorization works focus on
prompting, training paradigms, and datasets of
CLLMs, this paper explores tokenization, an
under-explored yet pivotal component of CLLMs.
Our research is motivated by the recently discov-
ered relationship between entropy and memoriza-
tion score. The work reveals that for a token se-
quence from the LLM training corpus, (an estima-
tor) of entropy is linearly related to memorization
score (Huang et al., 2026). By applying the pre-
vious discovery to the memorization of secrets,
this study reveals that although some gibberish-
like secrets (i.e., highly-randomized strings) are
high-entropy at the character-level, after tokeniza-
tion, some secrets are encoded to low-entropy to-
arXiv:2604.17814v1 [cs.CR] 20 Apr 2026

Developer
Source Code
Hosting Service
Dataset
Commit
jQ68fBxoQcutl5fS1vuY1
Train
Secret String
j Q 6 8 f B xo Q cut l 5 f S 1 vu Y 1
BPE-based Tokenization
CLLMs
Output
Adversary
Generate
Prompt
Query
Memorization
Online Service
Gibberish Bias
Figure 1: The risk map of secret leakage through CLLMs. The red box highlights the focus of this paper.
ken sequences, significantly reducing chances of
memorization. We coin the phenomenon as gib-
berish bias. Our research results indicate that the
risk of secret leakage is exacerbated with gibberish
bias.
This study conducts a deeper exploration of
gibberish bias.
We found that gibberish bias
should be attributed to Byte-pair Encoding (BPE),
the most popular tokenization strategy in (Code)
LLMs. We confirm that the root of gibberish bias
— BPE is sensitive to distribution shift between
train data and inference (test) data well. We then
discuss the bias under the current trend of “larger
tokenizers”. The final part of the paper discusses
the mitigation strategy and its broader implications
for tokenizer design. The contribution of this pa-
per is as follows:
1. This paper identifies a new risk of secret leak-
age through CLLMs: the tokenizer might in-
duce gibberish bias and further exacerbate the
secret leakage risk.
2. This paper explores the roots of such bias: BPE
is sensitive to the distribution shift between
train and test data.
3. This paper predicts that the secret leakage risk
will manifest more under the current “larger to-
kenizer” trend.
4. The paper discusses potential mitigation strate-
gies and broader implications for the commu-
nity.
2
Background
2.1
Tokenization of Code LLMs
In NLP, early explorations use word-level tok-
enization (e.g., word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013)),
name : ⎵JVM ⎵Tests ⎵& ⎵L int ⎵command : ./ grad lew ⎵check ⎵-- no -da emon
j
Q
6
8
f
B
xo
Q
cut
l
5
f
S
1
vu
Y
1
Code:
Secret:
Figure 2: Use BPE to tokenize one line of normal code
and secrets. Each token is a subword.
assigning each distinct word a unique index and
embedding. This approach imposed a fixed vo-
cabulary and sometimes resulted in the failure to
handle out-of-vocabulary (OOV) words (Mikolov
et al., 2013). Later, researchers developed sub-
word tokenization strategies that segment words
into smaller units.
The process typically includes three sequential
stages: (1) Pre-tokenization: a preprocessing step
that imposes rules on the raw text, such as whites-
pace splitting, normalization, or restrictions on al-
lowable character sequences. (2) Vocabulary Con-
struction: given a corpus and a target vocabulary
size, an algorithm selects a set of subword units
that constitute the vocabulary, Each subword is re-
garded as a token. (3) Segmentation: using the
constructed vocabulary, this step operationalizes
the mapping from raw text to subword sequences.
We note that before LLM training, model devel-
opers run stages (1) and (2) to establish the vocab-
ulary. The vocabulary should be strictly adhered to
all stages of LLM training (i.e., pre-training, post-
training).
During LLM training and inference,
only stages (1) and (3) are applied. In decoder-
only LLMs, a tokenizer assigns an input string to
a sequence of numerical IDs, which are further
transformed into embeddings via an embedding
matrix.
The core of tokenization is the vocabulary con-
struction algorithm (stage (2)), and the Byte-Pair

Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2016; Gage,
1994) is the de facto standard for LLMs since
GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019). It is a greedy, data-
driven merge algorithm that iteratively combines
the most frequent adjacent character or byte pairs
from the training corpus to build a subword vo-
cabulary. Starting from individual symbols, BPE
yields multi-character tokens for frequent patterns
(e.g., “ing”, “tion”) while splitting rare words into
smaller units. The total merging step is a hyper-
parameter, and depends on the empirical decision
of model trainers.
Code LLMs, including Deepseek Coder (Guo
et al., 2024), StarCoder2 (Hugging Face, 2024),
Qwen2.5-Coder (Hui et al., 2024), generally em-
ploy BPE-based tokenization, following the to-
kenizers on LLMs.
For CLLM tokenizers, the
vocabularies are slightly adapted towards code-
related tasks.
For example, many Code LLMs
adapt vocabularies on codebases to improve gener-
ation fidelity and ensure compilable output (Wang
et al., 2021). We further showcase how tokeniza-
tion works on an example string in Fig. 2.
2.2
Code Secrets and their Entropy
Software developers need secrets to authenticate
these third-party services as part of system inte-
gration. The secrets include API keys, access to-
kens, and private keys. While secrets are sensitive
assets during software development, careless de-
velopers may hard-code secrets in their code and
push it to online code hosting services like GitHub.
Recent studies have shown that a vast amount of
secrets are exposed in public software reposito-
ries (Basak et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2022; Meli
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2023; Wu et al., 5). These
secrets are collected as part of the training cor-
pus of CLLMs; hence, they might be accidentally
leaked by CLLMs.
Table 1:
Common secrets and their corresponding
regex patterns.
Secret type
Regex
AWS Access Key ID
AKIA[0-9A-Z]{16}
Google API Key
AIza[0-9A-Za-z-_]{35}
Tencent Cloud Secret ID
AKID[0-9a-zA-Z]{32}
An important property of code secrets is that
secrets typically exhibit high (char-level) en-
tropy (Shannon, 2001). For a human being, the
strings look like gibberish. High entropy indicates
high uniqueness. Consequently, for online service
providers, entropy is a pivotal design considera-
tion for the security of their secrets. Secrets typi-
cally follow a specific format, hence can be char-
acterized by regular expressions. Table 1 presents
examples of secrets of popular online services.
Mathematically, denote a secret as a sequence
s = (s1, s2, ..., s|s|), where each atomic element
could be either a char or a token. Denote the set of
all possible outcomes as V. Denote the expected
frequency of x as p(x), the entropy H of secret s
is
H(s) ≜−
X
x∈V
p(x) log p(x).
(1)
Taking GitHub personal access tokens 1 (Har-
vey, 2021) as an example, such tokens follow
the format specified by the regular expression
ghp_[a-zA-Z0-9]{36}. The char-level en-
tropy for this token is 5.915 bits, which is close
to the maximal entropy of 5.977 bits. We defer the
detailed calculation to appendix B.
3
Motivating Study: BPE Is
Counterintuitive on Secret Tokenization
Secrets are designed at character-level – the reg-
ular expression defines the secret format, and the
randomized part is random characters. However,
CLLMs process these strings on the token-level.
This section then presents a motivating study us-
ing visualizations, and reveals that BPE indeed re-
sults in counterintuitive behaviors.
3.1
Case Study
This case study discusses the tokenization ex-
ample in Figure 2.
The figure illustrates how
Deepseek Coder (Guo et al., 2024) tokenizes a part
of normal code and a secret (substring). We ob-
serve a significant difference in token granular-
ity: Although two strings present the same token
count, the source code is significantly longer mea-
sured in character-level length.
For typical source code, the tokenizer chunks
text in a way that is much expected: a token typi-
cally consists of multiple characters. Some words
are split into shorter sub-words. For example, the
word “-daemon” is represented by two tokens, “-
da” and “emon”. In contrast, the situation is much
different for secrets. Most of the tokens are one
character. Other tokens are characters of length
1“Tokens” in “personal access tokens” refers to the strings
for authentication purposes. Readers shall not confuse with
“tokens” used in (C)LLM tokenization.

Digit
Letter
Symbol
Digit
Letter
Symbol
Two tokens
Single token
Digit
Letter
Symbol
Digit
Letter
Symbol
Two tokens
Single token
Figure 3: Visualizing how Qwen2.5-Coder (left) and
Deepseek Coder (right) tokenize a 2-char sub-string of
secrets. Denote the substring as a1a2, a1 corresponds
to the horizontal coordinates of a pixel, and a2 corre-
sponds to the vertical coordinates of a pixel.
2 and 3. Interestingly, the tokenizer identifies an
English word “cut” in a gibberish-like string as a
token.
Even with one example, we could observe how
BPE-based tokenization might induce gibberish
bias. Tokens of secrets are distributed in a highly
non-uniform way. They include chars of length
1, 2, 3, maybe n > 10. Tokens of shorter char-
lengths may appear with higher frequency, while
longer ones may be less frequent. In information
theory, uniform distribution exhibits the maximal
entropy possible, and hence non-uniform random
variables exhibit less entropy. With less entropy,
secrets are increasingly likely to be memorized.
We leave the detailed calculation to Section 5.
3.2
Tokenizing 2-char secret sub-strings
To demonstrate how tokenizers perform poorly on
secrets, this section shows the tokenization of a
2-char randomly-generated string. The characters
are selected from a vocabulary of size 76, i.e., let-
ters (a-z, A-Z), digits (0-9), and other symbols.
These chars are commonly used by secrets. We
enumerate all the combinations of a 2-char string
given the vocabulary.
We examine each string
whether it is encoded to one token (in yellow) or
two tokens (in brown) and present the result in Fig-
ure 3. There is clearly a non-random distribution
of different encoding strategies. In general, we
observe certain character pairs that the tokenizer
tends not to split: (lowercase letter, lowercase let-
ter), (uppercase letter, uppercase letter), (symbol,
symbol), (letter, symbol). However, as one easily
finds out, many non-trivial corner cases exist. The
overall decision boundary is thus governed by a
complex interplay of statistical heuristics. Similar
patterns are observed on the Deepseek Coder tok-
enizer. We further observe consistent patterns on
unigram-based tokenizers (XLNet, T5); see Ap-
pendix D.
4
Gibberish Bias
Section 3.1 demonstrated that on secrets, BPE-
based tokenization may not function as ideally as
on normal data. In other words, it is potentially
biased – we term it gibberish bias.
This sec-
tion aims to formally describe gibberish bias us-
ing mathematical notations. Inspired by several
research works on secret memorization, we char-
acterize gibberish bias by memorization. Secret
leakage has strong implications for the commu-
nity, since upon leakage, these credentials may
grant an adversary access to online services, bring-
ing severe cybersecurity concerns.
4.1
Preliminaries
A recent LLM memorization work (Huang et al.,
2026) has shown that entropy, the essential prop-
erty that comes with the design of code secrets,
is closely related to memorization. The work dis-
covers the so-called Entropy-Memorization Law,
which could be formally described as follows.
Denote a fixed pre-trained LLM θ, prompt (a
token sequence) p, the golden answer (a token se-
quence) s, and a memorization score measuring
the difference between LLM continuation and the
golden answer d(θ(p), s).
The work studies two metrics, entropy and nor-
malized entropy of the answer sequence, M(s),
and M(s).
Note that the entropy notation is
slightly twisted from H(s) in Equation 1.
The
subtle difference lies in the outcome space V.
Since LLMs process strings at the token-level, V
is defined over tokens. Moreover, in the Entropy-
Memorization Law, the authors adopted a level-
set-based calculation for V, which we skip due to
space limitations.
With the established entropy notation, normal-
ized entropy quantifies how closely the entropy of
a sequence approaches the maximum possible en-
tropy. Normalized entropy eliminates the effects
of sample space size. It is defined as
M(s) ≜
M(s)
Mmax(s) = M(s)
log |V|.
(2)
Under specific conditions, a loose statement of
the Entropy-Memorization Law is:

1. M(s) is a proxy of d(θ(p), s). The rela-
tion is positively linear.
2. M(s) is a proxy of d(θ(p), s). The rela-
tion is negatively linear.
In other words, higher entropy of a token se-
quence indicates a lower chance of memorization.
Higher normalized entropy of a token sequence in-
dicates a higher chance of memorization.
In this work, we are interested in studying the
following metrics of the secret strings: character-
level entropy M(s), token-level entropy H(s),
and the normalized entropy, and their normalized
version M(s), H(s).
4.2
Tokenizing secrets
Experimental Setup.
We adopt the same exper-
imental setup as (Huang et al., 2026).
We use
OLMo-1B (Groeneveld et al., 2024), a fully-open
LLM with its training corpus Dolma (Soldaini
et al., 2024). In the experiments, we sampled 240k
sequences from Dolma. The dataset is licensed
by ODC-BY, granting free access for research pur-
poses. We reproduce the results with the same al-
gorithm adopted in (Huang et al., 2026). We study
the zero-distance set (where memorization score is
0, or “perfect memorization”) and try to identify
secret strings.
Experimental
Results.
Among
all
847
in-
stances within the zero-distance set, we identified
102 gibberish-like secrets through manual label-
ing. Some examples are shown below.
1 ESVXlO3url***Dw23KjZ
2 PszYzqs83S***N2N0Rj
3 5laXo6c1Ib***stxU9
Listing 1: Three examples of gibberish generated by
OLMo-1B. Part of these secrets are masked due to pri-
vacy concerns.
We conduct analysis over four sets: gibber-
ish, non-gibberish, zero-distance set, and non-
gibberish in the zero distance set 2.
We adopt
the entropy estimator and normalized entropy in-
troduced in this section over these four sets. The
results of our analysis are summarized in the fol-
lowing table.
2To clarify, non-secrets refers to the complement set of
labeled secrets. Therefore, “non-secrets” may include un-
labeled secrets. Due to the large size of the sampled corpus,
labeling on such an extensive scale is not feasible at this stage
of work.
The experimental results reveal the key find-
ings: high character-level entropy does not nec-
essarily imply high token-level entropy. In fact,
at the token-level, these secrets have significantly
lower entropy (8.084) than non-secrets (11.175);
while at the char-level, these secrets have signif-
icantly higher entropy (6.086) than non-secrets
(4.744). Besides, if we calculate the difference
delta between secrets and non-secrets, there is
a significant gap in normalized entropy between
token-level (∆= 0.806 −0.719 = 0.087) and
character-level (∆= 0.974 −0.361 = 0.613).
It is observed that at the token-level, the 102
identified gibberish uses more than 1k different
tokens. On the contrary, at char-level, they are
composed of 76 unique chars (i.e., A-Z, a-z, 0-
9, and 14 other chars). That showcases the out-
come space size discrepancy between char-level
and token-level, and explains our finding.
The findings may deviate from our human in-
tuition. A wrong logic chain of a human is: by
the Entropy-Memorization Law, secret strings are
highly randomized; hence, they have high entropy
and are hard to memorize. The problem lies in
the “high entropy property” naturally assumed by
our human beings – human beings perceive secrets
at the character level. In contrast, for LLMs, the
entropy should be calculated over the token level.
After tokenization, some high character-level nor-
malized entropy strings are transformed into low
entropy ones. Hence, the EM-Law suggests they
should be easier to memorize than an average non-
gibberish text.
We conclude this section with the full descrip-
tion of gibberish bias:
Gibberish bias
BPE-based tokenization transforms some
of the high character-level entropy se-
quences into low token-level entropy se-
quences.
5
How Does Tokenization Induce
Gibberish Bias?
The above results reveal an essential defect in-
duced by tokenization. The findings raise an in-
triguing and important question: How does this
happen? To explore the question, this section then
discusses the design issues of BPE.

Table 2: Statistics of secret memorization at token-level (T) and char-level (C).
Unique Elements
Entropy
Normalized Entropy
T
C
T
C
T
C
Zero-distance Set
3,661
105
7.834
5.110
0.662
0.761
Secrets
1,047
76
8.084
6.086
0.806
0.974
Non-Secrets
47,945
9,006
11.175
4.744
0.719
0.361
Non-Secrets in Zero-distance Set
2,897
105
7.329
4.966
0.637
0.740
Experimental
Setup
The
following
experi-
ments include tokenizers of three representative
Code LLMs: Deepseek Coder (Guo et al., 2024),
Qwen2.5-Coder (Hui et al., 2024), and Star-
Coder2 (Hugging Face, 2024). All model weights
and tokenizers are free to access for research
purposes. The experiments involve comparisons
on two datasets:
the “secret” dataset as intro-
duced in Section 4 and the subsample Stack V2
dataset (Hugging Face, 2024).
Stack V2 is the
training corpus of StarCoder2.
LLM trainers typically construct a sample cor-
pus that shares the distribution with the training
data to construct the vocabulary. Moreover, tok-
enizer design is fixed during the whole LLM train-
ing (and inference) process. However, in terms of
distribution, secret strings are essentially different
from the (Code) LLM training corpus. We regard
that gibberish bias may stem from the distribution
shift between secrets and a typical (Code) LLM
training corpus. This also matches our intuition
– secret data are highly randomized, while the
CLLM training corpus typically includes source
code collected from online code hosting services.
Then this section aims to answer the question:
Compared with the token distribution of the code
dataset to train CLLMs, how different is the distri-
bution of tokens in secrets?
Following the approach in the case study
(Sec. 3.1), we conduct tokenization on the secret
dataset and analyze the token composition of se-
crets.
To be specific, we report the frequency
of tokens based on their character length (n) for
all secret-related tokens in the dataset in Fig. 4.
We observed an exponential decrease in token fre-
quency as character length n increases, as evident
from the log-scale y-axis. The overall distribution
is long-tailed, leading to the low entropy of the to-
ken sequence. Interestingly, we even found tokens
with lengths of n ≥11 characters, indicating the
complexity of the tokenization decision boundary.
Ideally, the token distribution of secrets should
be uniform; but the observed distribution of BPE
tokens is long-tailed. From information theory, we
know that uniform distribution achieves the maxi-
mal entropy (Shannon, 2001), while non-uniform
distribution exhibits less entropy. The discrepancy
of token distributions supports the gibberish-bias
claim.
Next, we are interested in the causes of the iden-
tified long-tail distribution.
How do these long
char-length tokens form? We further sort the to-
kens on the secret dataset by frequency, and com-
pare them with the frequency of the same token on
a general CLLM dataset.
Fig. 5 ranks the most frequent 150 tokens on
the secret dataset, and compares the frequency of
each token on the subsampled Stack V2 dataset.
For both datasets, we employ the same tokenizer
StarCoder2.
The tokens distribution of the se-
cret dataset (yellow line), exhibits a much steeper
and more consistent drop-off in frequency for less
common tokens compared to the Stack V2 (brown
line). This observed divergence in log-proportion
frequencies strongly suggests a distribution shift
between the two datasets, particularly for tokens
beyond the most frequent few. Setting the Stack
V2 as the reference data distribution, we fur-
ther report the KL divergence between the secret
dataset and the Stack V2. The resulting KL diver-
gence is 2.668, demonstrating the discrepancy.
Using a CLLM tokenizer, the token distri-
bution of secret data is long-tailed – and
such a long-tailed distribution explains the
low entropy of secrets, hence explains the
claimed gibberish bias. Further investiga-
tion confirms the significant shift in dis-
tribution between secret data and general
CLLM training data.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
>=11
Char length of a token (N-char)
1
10
100
1000
Frequency (log scale)
Deepseek Coder
Qwen2.5-Coder
Figure 4: The distribution of n-char tokens.
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Token Freq. of Dist. A (log scale)
log_A_freq_ratio
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
Token Freq. of Dist. B (log scale)
log_B_freq_ratio
Figure 5: Token distributions on the subsampled Stack
V2 dataset (Distribution A, in brown) and the secret
dataset (Distribution B, in yellow).
6
Gibberish Bias Under a Larger
Tokenizer Vocabulary
There is a growing consensus in both academia
and industry that larger models shall benefit from
a larger vocabulary (Tao et al., 2024; Huang et al.,
2025). As the prevailing trends of building larger
Code LLMs, it is believed that CLLMs deserve
large vocabularies. Tao et al. (2024)’s work re-
veals that model parameters Nnv and the corre-
sponding optimal vocabulary size Nopt
v
approx-
imately follow a power law.
The authors fur-
ther find that almost all state-of-the-art general-
purpose LLMs and Code LLMs use vocab sizes
smaller than the predicted optimal one. Then a
question naturally arises: Will a larger vocabulary
size induce more gibberish bias?
We build three new tokenizers of StarCoder2
(3B, 7B, and 15B) using the sub-sampled stack
v2. We follow the IsoFLOPs (Tao et al., 2024) ap-
proach to generate tokenizers in “optimal” vocab-
ulary size. IsoFLOPs analysis suggests that size
39367 for the 3B model, size 62280 for the 7B
model, and size 93987 for the 15B model. We
then trained these tokenizers using the subsam-
pled Stack V2 dataset, based on the suggested size.
For clarity of presentations, these tokenizers are
named SC-3B-o, SC-7B-o, and SC-15B-o, respec-
tively.
With three new tokenizers,
we investigate
gibberish bias on the secret dataset.
Follow-
ing (Huang et al., 2026), we report the entropy and
normalized-entropy of these secrets introduced in
Section 2.2 at the token-level.
To compare metrics on secrets and non-secrets,
we use a “sec./non-sec.” ratio. Table 3 shows the
overall result. First, the results on new tokeniz-
ers converge with those of OLMo tokenizers dis-
cussed in Section 4. Compared to non-secrets, se-
crets exhibit lower entropy at the token level and
higher entropy at the char level; secrets achieve
almost maximal normalized entropy. Second, re-
garding the sec./non-sec. ratio, it is observed that
the relative difference between secrets and non-
secrets is slightly expanding. For both entropy and
normalized entropy metrics, the sec./non-sec. ra-
tio keeps deviating from the baseline ratio 1. We
summarize our findings in this section as follows:
Gibberish bias tends to be more pro-
nounced in models employing larger tok-
enizer vocabularies.
7
Related Work
Empirical quantification of secret memoriza-
tion.
Initial memorization research focused on
empirically demonstrating and quantifying this
risk (Carlini et al., 2021).
HCR (Huang et al.,
2024a) is a method proposed to test and vali-
date the leakage of hard-coded credentials from
neural code completion tools using prompts de-
rived from public GitHub files. Similarly, Yang
et al. (2024b) conducted a systematic study show-
ing that CLLMs memorize a broad range of data
related to code.
A study (Wu et al., 2025)
investigates how memorization leads to general
code cloning, raising concerns about copyright in-
fringement and bug propagation.
Other studies
explore code clone as implementations of mem-
orization (Ciniselli et al., 2022; Al-Kaswan and
Izadi, 2023). Recent research probes the underly-
ing mechanisms at a finer granularity. For exam-
ple, DESEC (Nie et al., 2025) addresses the prob-
lem from the decoding stage.
Tokenization shapes LLM performance.
Tok-
enizer design has been shown to cause unexpected
downstream harms, such as cross-lingual unfair-
ness (Petrov et al., 2023) and the misalignment

Table 3: Entropy and normalized entropy of secrets when using different tokenizers. “Sec.” refers to “Secrets”.
Entropy
Normalized Entropy
SC-3B-o
SC-7B-o
SC-15B-o
Char
SC-3B-o SC-7B-o
SC-15B-o
Char
Sec.
6.931
7.076
7.145
6.086
0.777
0.774
0.773
0.974
Non-Sec.
9.136
9.355
9.575
4.745
0.721
0.714
0.708
0.361
Sec./Non-Sec.
0.759
0.756
0.746
1.283
1.079
1.085
1.092
2.695
between subword tokenization and code gram-
mar (Li et al., 2025); we identify an analogous pri-
vacy harm, showing how standard tokenizers can
inadvertently reduce the token-level entropy of se-
crets, making them inherently more vulnerable to
memorization.
8
Discussions
8.1
Implications on Safeguarding Secrets
Mitigating gibberish bias.
We propose two
mitigation strategies.
The first is to enforce
character-wise tokenization for secrets (details in