Blockchain-Driven AI-Enhanced Post-Quantum
Multivariate Identity-based Signature and
Privacy-Preserving Data Aggregation Scheme for
Fog-enabled Flying Ad-Hoc Networks
Sufian Al majmaiea,∗, Ghazal Ghajaria, Niraj Prasad Bhattab, Fathi
Amsaada
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435,
USA
bDepartment of Computer Engineering, University Of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
45219, USA
Abstract
The integration of Fog Computing with Flying Ad-Hoc Networks (FANETs)
offers promising capabilities for decentralized, low-latency intelligence in UAV-
based applications. However, the distributed nature, mobility, and resource
constraints of FANETs expose them to significant security and privacy chal-
lenges, particularly against quantum threats. To address these issues, this
work introduces a blockchain-based, AI-enhanced key management frame-
work designed for fog-enabled FANETs. The proposed scheme employs a
Post-Quantum Multivariate Identity-Based Signature Scheme (PQ-MISS)
and Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) to achieve secure key establishment,
privacy-preserving data aggregation, and integrity verification. A polyno-
mial composition-based encryption mechanism and an aggregate signature
model support secure and efficient multi-device communication across fog
and UAV layers. Fog servers construct partial blockchain blocks from vali-
dated UAV data. These blocks are completed and mined by Cloud Servers
(CSs). AI algorithms then analyze the verified data to generate accurate pre-
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: al-majmaie.2@wright.edu (Sufian Al majmaie),
ghajari.2@wright.edu (Ghazal Ghajari), bhattand@mail.uc.edu (Niraj Prasad
Bhatta), fathi.amsaad@wright.edu (Fathi Amsaad), (Fathi Amsaad)
arXiv:2604.18819v1 [cs.CR] 20 Apr 2026

dictions and insights. NS-3 simulations validate the efficiency of PQ-MISS in
reducing communication overhead while improving the speed and reliability
of data aggregation and verification. Comparative analysis demonstrates the
proposed scheme’s advantages over existing methods in computational cost,
post-quantum security, and scalability, making it a robust solution for secure,
intelligent, and future-ready FANET systems.
Keywords:
Post-Quantum Cryptography, Identity-Based Signature,
Blockchain, Fog Computing, Flying Ad-Hoc Networks (FANETs),
Aggregate Signature.
1. Introduction
Integrating Fog Computing with Flying Ad-Hoc Networks (FANETs) has
emerged as a transformative approach for enabling low-latency, decentral-
ized, and intelligent aerial applications. FANETs, consisting of unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) that communicate wirelessly with each other and with
ground control stations, are increasingly employed in time-critical opera-
tions such as disaster response, border surveillance, agriculture, and real-
time traffic monitoring. However, traditional cloud-based models suffer from
high latency and single points of failure, making them unsuitable for the
dynamic and distributed nature of FANET environments. Fog computing
addresses these limitations by pushing computational resources closer to the
edge, enabling localized decision-making, context-aware data aggregation,
and reduced transmission overhead [1, 2].
Despite these advantages, FANETs remain highly susceptible to various
security and privacy challenges due to their open communication medium,
mobility, and limited computational resources. Attacks such as Sybil, imper-
sonation, message replay, GPS spoofing, and eavesdropping are particularly
problematic in UAV swarms [3, 4]. Furthermore, secure authentication and
data aggregation in such networks are constrained by latency requirements,
energy limitations, and the need for real-time integrity verification. Exist-
ing cryptographic protocols such as RSA and ECC, while effective against
classical threats, are vulnerable to quantum attacks as demonstrated by algo-
rithms such as Shor’s and Grover’s. This has motivated research into post-
quantum cryptography (PQC), particularly multivariate polynomial-based
schemes that are both efficient and resistant to quantum adversaries [5, 6].
Multivariate public key cryptosystems (MPKCs), such as Unbalanced Oil
2

and Vinegar (UOV) and Rainbow, have shown promise for post-quantum
digital signatures due to their small key sizes and fast signing operations [7].
However, many of these schemes suffer from high verification costs, unproven
resistance to chosen-message attacks, or limited scalability. Identity-based
signature (IBS) schemes offer certificate-free public key infrastructures that
are well suited for mobile networks such as FANETs. Notable studies, such
as [8, 9], have explored IBS for multivariate settings, but these schemes were
either insecure under adaptive attacks or computationally inefficient for ag-
gregate verification.
In parallel, blockchain technology has emerged as a robust platform for
decentralized authentication, secure data logging, and integrity assurance in
distributed systems. Its application to FANETs has been explored in contexts
such as flight path validation, access control, and UAV swarm coordination
[6, 10]. However, conventional blockchain frameworks face challenges such as
high latency and energy consumption when deployed in resource-constrained
environments. Lightweight blockchain adaptations, including partial block
construction at fog nodes and optimized consensus algorithms such as PBFT,
have been proposed to mitigate these issues [11, 12].
Artificial intelligence (AI) also plays an increasingly important role in the
FANET security stack. The large volume of heterogeneous data collected by
UAVs, covering telemetry, imagery, environmental readings, and system met-
rics, offers significant potential for predictive analytics and anomaly detec-
tion. Deep learning models, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) net-
works, can forecast UAV trajectories, detect intrusions, and optimize routing
paths [13, 14]. When integrated with blockchain, AI algorithms can securely
access and learn from verified data, improving threat intelligence and op-
erational reliability without compromising privacy [15]. Nevertheless, most
existing studies treat AI, blockchain, and cryptographic security as isolated
layers, missing the opportunity for a holistic co-design.
Despite these advancements, no current solution provides an inte-
grated framework that combines post-quantum identity-based authentica-
tion, blockchain-backed secure data aggregation, and AI-enabled predic-
tive analytics tailored for the constraints of fog-enabled FANETs. Existing
blockchain-UAV systems lack post-quantum resistance. AI-based UAV opti-
mization frameworks overlook secure key management. Many PQC schemes
are not designed to support multi-signer aggregation, leading to inefficiencies
in resource-constrained aerial swarms.
To address this gap, we propose PQ-MISS, a blockchain-driven, AI-
3

enhanced post-quantum multivariate identity-based signature and privacy-
preserving data aggregation mechanism for fog-enabled FANET environ-
ments. This research builds upon existing works in identity-based crypto-
graphic methods, blockchain security, and AI-driven enhancements for UAV
networks. IBS schemes have been studied in multivariate cryptographic set-
tings for securing IoT and ad hoc networks [5, 6]. The security of FANET
communications has been addressed using various cryptographic primitives,
including public key infrastructures and aggregate signature schemes [8, 9].
Furthermore, blockchain integration with AI has been explored to enhance
UAV operations, ensuring secure and efficient data aggregation and predic-
tion modeling [11, 12]. The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We propose an aggregate signature mechanism based on a Post-
Quantum Multivariate Identity-Based Signature Scheme (PQ-MISS)
tailored for fog-enabled FANET applications. In the proposed design,
UAV drones and smart devices act as signers, while fog devices (FDs)
serve as aggregators. Once the aggregated signatures are verified, the
responsible cloud server (CS) within the peer-to-peer CS network gener-
ates and mines blocks using a voting-based consensus algorithm. These
blocks are then incorporated into a public blockchain to ensure secure
and tamper-evident data storage.
Authenticated data stored in the
blockchain is subsequently leveraged by machine learning (ML) algo-
rithms to produce accurate predictive analytics.
• We implement and evaluate the proposed PQ-MISS using the NS-3
network simulator.
The computational time required for generating
and verifying both single and aggregate signatures is measured across
FANET devices, FDs, and CSs.
• We perform a blockchain simulation to evaluate the computational time
for block mining under different transaction volumes and block sizes.
Results show that the proposed mechanism achieves improved efficiency
and enhanced security compared to existing benchmark schemes.
2. Related Work
2.1. Post-Quantum Cryptography and Identity-Based Signature Schemes
Quantum computing poses a serious threat to traditional cryptographic
mechanisms, prompting the development of post-quantum cryptographic
4

(PQC) solutions. Multivariate Public Key Cryptosystems (MPKCs) have
been extensively studied for their quantum resistance and efficiency in
resource-constrained environments [5].
Rainbow and Unbalanced Oil and
Vinegar (UOV) schemes offer high-speed signature generation and verifica-
tion, with recent research focusing on optimizing key sizes and improving
resistance to chosen-message attacks [6, 16].
Identity-Based Signature (IBS) schemes mitigate key management over-
head by deriving public keys from user identities, thereby eliminating the
need for digital certificates. Several studies have combined IBS with MP-
KCs to create post-quantum secure identity frameworks [17, 9]. Shen et al.
[8] proposed an identity-based scheme using UOV, but subsequent work by
Luyen et al. [9] revealed vulnerabilities stemming from improper parameter
selection. Chen et al. [7] improved the structure by introducing a multivari-
ate IBS with better efficiency and enhanced security features.
Despite these advancements, most existing schemes do not provide sig-
nature aggregation, certificate elimination, and low computational cost si-
multaneously—requirements that are essential for UAV-based applications.
Our proposed PQ-MISS enhances unforgeability, removes the need for certifi-
cates, and supports aggregate signatures, making it more suitable for FANET
deployment.
2.2. Blockchain for Secure FANET Communications
Blockchain has become a key enabler for securing Internet of Drones (IoD)
and FANET systems due to its distributed trust model, tamper resistance,
and transparent verification.
It has been used for identity management,
access control, and secure communication in UAV systems [11].
Das et al. [18] introduced iGCACS-IoD, a certificate-based authentication
scheme using blockchain for secure access control. Similarly, Bera et al. [11]
proposed an authenticity scheme for UAVs in agricultural settings based on
private blockchain technology. However, both approaches rely on classical
cryptographic primitives, leaving them vulnerable to quantum attacks.
Yu et al. [12] presented SLAP-IoD, an authentication protocol integrating
Physical Unclonable Functions (PUFs) to enhance hardware security through
a lightweight blockchain framework. While effective in certain contexts, it
does not provide post-quantum security or support aggregate verification.
In contrast, our solution uses blockchain not only for logging but also for
secure multi-party aggregation and validated UAV transactions, combined
with a PQC-ready identity framework.
5

2.3. AI-Driven Optimization for FANETs
Machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) are increasingly
vital for enhancing autonomy, resource management, and threat analysis in
UAV networks. FANETs generate large volumes of telemetry, mission data,
and environmental information, which can be exploited by ML for route
optimization, anomaly detection, and behavior prediction.
Recent works employ deep learning models such as Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) networks to optimize networks and predict trajectories
in dynamic UAV topologies [19]. AI models trained on blockchain-verified
datasets improve resilience to pattern-based and spoofing attacks while en-
abling real-time prediction [11].
Most existing approaches, however, apply AI in isolation, without em-
bedding it into cryptographic or blockchain security layers. Our proposed
framework tightly integrates AI with secure, blockchain-stored data to pro-
vide trustworthy, intelligent decision-making in adversarial environments.
2.4. Comparative Analysis of Existing Schemes
To position the proposed PQ-MISS framework in the broader context, it
is needed to survey state-of-the-art blockchain- and signature-based solutions
for UAV, FANET, and IoT cases. The works exhibit significant progress in
decentralized trust management, agile cryptography, and lightweight authen-
tication, but they mostly suffer from limitations due to scalability constraints,
vulnerability against quantum-capable adversaries, or restricted adaptability
for highly dynamic FANET networks. For a systematic comparison, the com-
parison analysis in the remainder of this section identifies five key dimensions:
post-quantum resistance (PQ), identity-based signature use (IBS), aggregate
signature support (Agg.), blockchain support (BC), and the characteristic
property describing each design. Table 1 gives an overview of these proper-
ties among those of representative state-of-the-art solutions and the proposed
PQ-MISS. As indicated by the table, the prior solutions normally meet only
a few of these requirements, whereas PQ-MISS meets all of them by fol-
lowing an integrated construction optimized for scalable and secure FANET
deployments.
Shen et al. [8] proposed the Identity-Based Unbalanced Oil and Vinegar
(IBUOV) scheme to eliminate the need for certificates in multivariate cryp-
tography by deriving public keys directly from identity information. While
provably secure with minimal key management, it inherits UOV’s long public
key drawback, limiting its practicality for UAV platforms. Luyen et al. [9]
6

Table 1: Comparative analysis of PQ-MISS and existing post-quantum blockchain and
signature schemes
Scheme
PQ
IBS
Agg.
BC
Distinctive Feature
Proposed
✓
✓
✓
✓
Fog-layer
signature
aggregation
with
AI-assisted
post-quantum
inference in FANETs
Holcomb et al. [20]
✓
✗
✗
✓
Crypto-agile hybrid signatures in
Hyperledger Fabric; migration to
PQ via OQS library
Kim et al. [21]
✓
✗
✗
✓
Falcon-based delegated consensus
with verifiable randomness and low
energy usage
Zhang et al. [22]
✓
✓
✗
✓
Lattice-based IBS with traceability,
forward security, and layered IoT
model integration
Prajapat et al. [23]
✓
✓
✗
✗
Quantum designated verifier signa-
tures with OTP, source hiding, and
non-repudiation
Dong et al. [24]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Blockchain-based
UAV
re-
authentication
via
clustering,
task migration, and redundancy
Shen et al. [8]
✓
✓
✗
✗
Unbalanced Oil and Vinegar IBS
with provable security against ex-
istential forgery
Luyen et al. [9]
✓
✓
✗
✗
Rainbow-based
IBS
with
EUF-
CMA security and compact key and
signature sizes
Yu et al. [12]
✗
✗
✗
✗
Lightweight PUF-based authentica-
tion for secure UAV-device pairing
Das et al. [18]
✗
✗
✗
✓
Blockchain-enabled
certificate-
based access control with group
and role-aware policies
advanced a Rainbow-based IBS achieving existential unforgeability against
chosen-message attacks (EU-CMA) with shorter signatures than IBUOV, but
still burdened by large public keys and computational cost.
Zhang et al.
[22] developed a lattice-based IBS (PQ-IDS) leveraging
bimodal Gaussian distributions and discrete Gaussian sampling to achieve
post-quantum security, identity binding, and blockchain integration via a
three-layer IoT architecture. Kim et al. [21] introduced the Post-Quantum
Delegated Proof of Luck (PQ-DPoL) consensus, embedding the NIST-
approved Falcon signature into blockchain consensus for fairness and quan-
tum resistance, albeit with trade-offs in signature size and verification time.
Holcomb et al. [20] extended Hyperledger Fabric with PQFabric, using Open
Quantum Safe (OQS) algorithms for quantum-safe migration. While improv-
ing long-term security, performance is impacted by larger signatures and
7

hashing overhead.
Prajapat et al. [23] presented a quantum designated verifier signature
(QDVS) scheme relying on entangled quantum states, secure but imprac-
tical for UAVs without quantum infrastructure.
Yu et al.
[12] proposed
the lightweight SLAP-IoD PUF-based authentication scheme, verified via
AVISPA and Real-Or-Random (ROR) analysis, but lacking blockchain inte-
gration and multi-party signing.
Dong et al. [24] introduced a blockchain-based identity authentication
framework tailored for multi-cluster UAV networking. Their design incorpo-
rates a UAV disconnection–reconnection mechanism and a task result backup
strategy to enhance cluster robustness and preserve task integrity. While the
approach effectively mitigates availability issues in UAV swarms, it relies on
classical cryptographic primitives and omits support for post-quantum re-
silience and identity-based aggregation. Consequently, despite its strengths
in reliability, the scheme remains unsuitable for long-term FANET security
in the presence of quantum-capable adversaries.
Finally, Das et al. [18] developed iGCACS-IoD, enhancing key manage-
ment and preventing impersonation, yet relying on classical cryptography
vulnerable to quantum adversaries.
This review underscores the progress in identity-based and post-quantum
signature protocols, with multivariate and lattice-based techniques domi-
nating. Nonetheless, lightweight designs with native blockchain integration
remain essential for future-proof UAV and IoT security.
2.5. Paper Organization
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 3 intro-
duces notation and hardness assumptions, recalls the 5-pass identification
protocol, formalizes the ISS model, and states the uf-cma security game.
Section 4 presents the fog-enabled FANET architecture and trust assump-
tions. Section 5 details the PQ-MISS design, including system setup and the
KeyGen, LSSign, LSVer, LASign, and LAVer algorithms. Section 6 shows the
end-to-end application in IoT/FANETs, covering registration, data collection
and fog-layer aggregation, blockchain block formation and PBFT-based com-
mitment, AI-assisted prediction, and dynamic node onboarding. Section 7
reports NS-3.25 simulation results and blockchain-side computation costs,
comparing PQ-MISS with MV-MSS [25] and LBAS [26]. Finally, Section 8
concludes and outlines future directions.
8

3. Preliminaries
Before describing the proposed PQ-MISS scheme, we outline the math-
ematical foundations and cryptographic tools on which our construction is
built. This section introduces the underlying hardness assumptions, the mul-
tivariate identification protocol, identity-based signature framework, and the
uf-cma security model used for our security analysis. Let ˆs be the security
factor, x ∈R S where x is selected randomly from set S, Fq denotes finite
field containing q elements, Fqζ represent extension of Fq of degree ζ, and
(Fq)ζ = {y = (y1, . . . , yζ) | yi ∈Fq}, i = 1, . . . , ζ represents vector space.
3.1. Assumption related to Hardness
The proposed MISS entrusts its security to the rigidity of the MQ problem
which is represented as follows: Given a system, Q = (q(ρ1,...,ρn)
1
, . . . , q(ρ1,...,ρn)
m
)
with m quadratic equations involving (ρ1, . . . , ρn) variables, it is essential to
determine n tuples (¯ρ1, . . . , ¯ρn) such that:
ω(ρ1,...,ρn)
1
= · · · = ω(ρ1,...,ρn)
m
= 0
3.2. Multivariate Identification Method
Zero-knowledge (ZK) mechanisms allow clients to demonstrate that they
possess specific information without revealing it to the verifier [6].For exam-
ple, consider Alice who attempts to solve the Tower of Hanoi problem [27].
She wants to prove to Bob that she has the solution without disclosing it.
She presents Bob with a specific instance of the problem and solves it using a
modified approach. Once the solution is complete, she shows the solved puz-
zle to Bob. This helps Bob become convinced that she can solve the problem
without revealing the actual solution method. The identification scheme can
be built using the above idea and is shown in Figure 1.
A MISS uses a randomly selected MQ system: Fn
q →Fm
q . Security of a
MISS depends on assumption that MQ problem seems to be hard. When
Alice wants to show her ID to Bob, she is the prover, and Bob is the verifier
who needs to be convinced. She desires to show Bob that she has understood
the computation of ˜s, a solution of P(˜x) = ˜v by not unveiling any information
related to ˜s. This mechanism may be built using ZKP. To build a ZKP with
˜s, a function which is the polar form of P given by
G(V1, V2) = P(V1 + V2) −P(V1) −P(V2) + P(0)
9

Figure 1: Sequence of steps in 5-Pass Identification Protocol
is defined. By using Commit, a computationally binding as well as statis-
tically hiding commitment method, Sakumoto et al. [6] have built a 5-pass
mechanism for identification using ˜s. Assume that Soundness Error (SE),
SE = 1/2+1/2q. To attain the anticipated security level and lessen the prob-
ability of impersonation, the protocol must be executed in several rounds.
The number of rounds essential for reaching security level of ζ is
r =

−ζ
log2(KE)

3.3. Identity-Based Signature Scheme (IBS)
Identity-Based Signature (IBS) schemes allow users to generate digital
signatures without relying on traditional certificate-based public key infras-
tructures. Instead, a trusted authority generates private keys using a user’s
unique identity (e.g., email, drone ID, etc.) as the public key input. This
eliminates the need for complex key management systems, an advantage in
resource-constrained environments such as FANETs.
We follow the IBS model introduced by Paterson and Schuldt [17], which
includes four main algorithms. Let ˆs be the security parameter, ID ∈{0, 1}∗
a user identity, and Mg ∈{0, 1}∗a message.
10

• Setup(1ˆs): Given the security parameter ˆs, the Secret Key Generation
Center (KGC) generates the master public key Mpk and master secret
key Msk.
• Extract(Msk, ID): The KGC uses the master secret key Msk and iden-
tity ID to produce the user’s signing key UID.
• Signature Generation(UID, Mg): Using UID and message Mg, the
user runs the signing algorithm to produce a signature φ = Sign(Mg).
• Signature Verification(Mpk, Mg, φ, ID): The verifier checks the va-
lidity of the signature φ using the tuple (Mpk, Mg, φ, ID). If the signa-
ture is valid for the given identity, the algorithm returns 1, otherwise
it returns 0.
3.4. Unforgeability under Chosen-Message and Chosen-Identity Attack (uf-
cma)
The uf-cma is a standard for ensuring security in an Identity-Based Signa-
ture Scheme, first introduced by [28]. It is well-defined by an "experiment" or
a "game" played between a Challenger (C) and a Forger (F). For an IBS with
the same set of algorithms described earlier, the experiment ExIBS(1ˆs)uf-cma
proceeds as follows: The Challenger (C) executes Setup(1ˆs) to generate the
key pair (Mpk, Msk) and forwards Mpk to the Forger (F). The Forger sends
queries dynamically to the Challenger.
Extract-query: For ID ∈{0, 1}∗, F asks C for the corresponding secret
key. In response, C executes Extract(Msk, ID) to generate UID and sends it
to F.
Sign-query: For ID ∈{0, 1}∗and a message Mg, F requests a signature.
In response, C first computes UID = Extract(Msk, ID), then generates φ =
Sign(Mg), and sends it to F.
Eventually, F outputs a tuple (ID∗, Mg∗, φ∗). The Forger wins if:
Verify(Mpk, Mg∗, φ∗, ID∗) = 1
and F has not previously requested an Extract-query on ID∗or a Sign-query
on (ID∗, Mg∗).
The success probability (or advantage) of the Forger is:
Advuf-cma
F
= Pr

ExIBS(1ˆs)uf-cma = 1

An IBS is considered uf-cma secure if the probability above is negligible in
ˆs.
11

P2P cloud Blockchain Center
FD (Aggregator)
Step 2. Registration of FD
Step 5
Verify the aggregate signature 
Create a block from the received transactions 
Mine the block using the consensus algorithm
Step 1. Registration of SD
Smart Drones
Step 3. Collect data, create 
a signature
KGC
Step 4
Verify each individual signature
Create an aggregate signature on
validated transactions
Figure 2: Network model used in Fog-enabled Flying Ad-Hoc Networks
4. Network Model
In the proposed scheme, the network model includes drones, fog devices,
and cloud servers as illustrated in Figure 2. Our network model consists of the
following components: drones, fog devices (FDs), a control room serving as
the key generation center (KGC), and cloud servers. Drones are responsible
for collecting data from designated application areas or flying zones and
signing these messages. Each drone is equipped with IoT-enabled devices
such as GPS, cameras, flight controllers, and transceivers.
The FD functions as an aggregator, gathering individually signed mes-
sages from its drones. It verifies each signature, creates an aggregate signa-
ture, and then sends this to a cloud server for storage in a blockchain net-
work consisting of a Peer-to-Peer (P2P) cloud servers network. The network
utilizes a consensus algorithm for block validation. Additionally, AI-based
data analysis within the cloud servers utilizes genuine data stored in private
blockchains to make accurate predictions.
The cloud server verifies the aggregate signature, creates blocks, and
mines them to add to the public blockchain. The control room, acting as
KGC, registers all drones and FDs by generating their key pairs using a
lattice-based algorithm. The control room is fully trusted, while FDs are
semi-trusted. Both are physically secured to prevent attacks. Cloud servers
in the P2P network are also considered semi-trusted.
After registration,
12

drones and their corresponding FDs can be deployed operationally.
The
cloud servers, as part of a distributed system, facilitate the use of public
blockchain storage.
5. Proposed Scheme
5.1. System Architecture Overview
This work introduces a novel scheme named Post-Quantum Multivariate
Identity-Based Signature Scheme (PQ-MISS), designed to resist quantum
computing attacks in resource-constrained environments such as fog-enabled
FANETs.
The cryptographic foundations of PQ-MISS rely on the Multi-
variate Public Key Cryptosystem MISS proposed by Ding and Schmidt [5],
enhanced with the 5-pass identification protocol of Sakumoto et al. [6] and
transformed into a signature scheme using the method of Hülsing et al. [16].
The PQ-MISS scheme consists of four algorithms:
• Setup: The Key Generation Center (KGC) takes a security parameter
ˆs and generates a Master Public Key (Mpk) and a Master Secret Key
(Msk). Mpk is made public while Msk remains private.
• Extract: KGC produces the private key of a user (UID) by implement-
ing this algorithm for a user whose identity is ID ∈{0, 1}∗.
• Signature Generation:
For message Mg ∈{0, 1}∗, a user with
ID ∈{0, 1}∗and UID executes this procedure to generate signature
φ = Sign(Mg).
• Signature Verification: The correctness of the signature (φ) is veri-
fied by the verifier by implementing this method on input that includes
Mpk, Mg, φ, and ID.
The size of Mpk is
m(n + 2)(n + 1)
2
and the size of Msk is
n2 + m2 + c
field elements over Fq, where c represents the size of the central map, and
m and n denote the number of public polynomials and variables of the PQ-
MISS scheme, respectively. The parameters m and n in Fq elements also
denote the sizes of user IDs and the private key, respectively.
13

The size of the signature is
2Ψ · |Commitment| + Ψ(m + 2n)
Fq elements, where Ψ represents the number of rounds required for the pro-
posed PQ-MISS protocol. Luyen [9] stated that Shen et al. [8] selected in-
correct parameters for the security level and evaluated incorrect key sizes. In
this work, parameters are chosen correctly. Furthermore, the ISS proposed
by Shen et al. [8] fails to provide uf-cma security.
The IBS of Luyen [9] resembles a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), where
each user has a different public key (PK). The KGC links the PK of a user
with their ID through a digital certificate, which is attached to a non-ID-
based signature. In PQ-MISS, digital certificates are not required to associate
a user’s PK with their identity.
In the IBS of Chen et al. [7], ¯F and Mpk are used as functions of UID =
(z1, . . . , zd).
If the signature generated by a user (UID) is to be verified,
the expression of ¯F for UID must be evaluated, increasing the computation
complexity for the verifier. The proposed scheme addresses this challenge
since Mpk is not a function of UID.
The proposed scheme ensures uf-cma security, similar to Luyen [9]. The
IBS of Chen et al. [7] does not ensure security. Our scheme also offers better
performance than several prior works [1, 9, 7] for the same sizes of Mpk,
private key, and Msk, and involves a smaller signature size compared to
some methods [8, 9]. The proposed scheme is highly suitable for a fog-based
FANET network, where a lightweight IBS is essential for building a robust
and secure system.
5.2. Cryptographic Design of PQ-MISS
In the proposed PQ-MISS, MISS [5], including 5-pass identification, is
used as the fundamental block of the system. The scheme propounded by
[16] is used in the proposed scheme. This method focuses on transforming
the identification scheme into a signature scheme. PQ-MISS includes the
above-mentioned algorithms. For input ˆs, KGC executes the Setup proce-
dure to generate Mpk and Msk. During Extract, KGC produces the private
key of a user (UID) for a user with ID ∈{0, 1}∗. For Mg ∈{0, 1}∗, the
Signature Generation algorithm is executed by a user with ID ∈{0, 1}∗and
UID to produce φ = Sign(Mg). The verifier runs Signature Verification on
(Mpk, Mg, φ, ID) to validate the signature correctness. Commit is used in
the proposed PQ-MISS.
14

5.2.1. Setup(1ˆs)
KGC executes KeyGen on 1ˆs for the MQ-based signature mechanism to
produce
Mpk = P = S ◦F ◦T : Fn
q →Fm
q ,
Msk = {S, F, T}.
5.2.2. Extract(Msk, ID)
For Msk and ID ∈{0, 1}∗, KGC:
1. Obtains kID ∈Fm
q by determining Hash(ID) = kID, where Hash() is a
cryptographically secure and collision-resistant hash function.
2. Determines UID = P −1(kID) ∈Fn
q using Msk = {S, F, T}.
3. Forwards UID to the user with identity ID.
5.2.3. Signature Generation(UID, Mg)
The user with ID generates a signature for Mg ∈{0, 1}∗with UID as
follows:
1. Determines a = Hash1(P∥Mg) using Hash1, a collision-resistant hash
function that is cryptographically secure.
2. Selects f 1
0, . . . , f Ψ
0 , g1
0, . . . , gΨ
0
∈R Fn
q and h1
0, . . . , hΨ
0
∈R Fm
q , j =
1, . . . , Ψ.
(a) Computes f j
1 = UID −f j
0.
(b) Assesses βj
0 = Commit(f j
0, gj
0, hj
0), βj
1 = Commit(f j
1, G(gj
0, f j
1) +
hj
0).
3. Sets Comm = (β1
0, β1
1, . . . , βΨ
0 , βΨ
1 ).
4. Determines challenges Hash2(a∥Comm) = (δ1, . . . , δΨ) ∈FΨ
q .
5. Assesses gj
1 = δjf j
0 −gj
0 and hj
1 = δjP(f j
0) −hj
0, j = 1, . . . , Ψ.
6. Writes Res1 = (g1
1, h1
1, . . . , gΨ
1 , hΨ
1 ).
7. Determines challenge Hash3(a∥Comm∥Res1) = (V1, . . . , VΨ) ∈{0, 1}Ψ
using Hash3.
8. Sets Res2 = (f 1
V1, . . . , f Ψ
VΨ).
9. Returns signature as φ = Sign(Mg) = (Comm, Res1, Res2).
The length of the signature is 2Ψ·|Commitment|+Ψ·(m+2n) Fq elements.
15

5.2.4. Signature Verification(Mpk, Mg, φ = Sign(Mg), ID)
The verifier performs the following steps to check the validity of
(Mg, Sign(Mg)) for a user with ID:
1. Determines Hash(ID) = sID.
2. Evaluates a = Hash1(P∥Mg) and derives challenges (δ1, . . . , δΨ) =
Hash2(a∥Comm) ∈FΨ
q and (V1, . . . , VΨ) = Hash3(a∥Comm∥Res1) ∈
{0, 1}Ψ.
3. Parses Comm into (β1
0, β1
1, . . . , βΨ
0 , βΨ
1 ), Res1 into (g1
1, h1
1, . . . , gΨ
1 , hΨ
1 )
and Res2 into (f 1
V1, . . . , f Ψ
VΨ).
4. For each j = 1, . . . , Ψ:
• If Vj = 0:
βj
0
?= Commit

f j
Vj, δjf j
Vj −gj
1, δjP(f j
Vj) −hj
1

• If Vj = 1:
βj
1
?= Commit

f j
Vj, δj(sID −P(f j
Vj) + P(0)) −G(gj
1, f j
Vj) −hj
1

If all equalities hold, (Mpk, Mg, φ, ID) = 1; otherwise, (Mpk, Mg, φ, ID) =
0.
Correctness: Correctness of MISS is proved by considering the equalities
in Step 4.
For Vj = 0,
βj
0 = Commit

f j
Vj, δjf j
Vj −gj
1, δjP(f j
Vj) −hj
1

.
(1)
For Vj = 1,
βj
1 = Commit

f j
Vj, δj(sID −P(f j
Vj) + P(0)) −G(gj
1, f j
Vj) −hj
1

.
(2)
Where j = 1, . . . , Ψ.
Case 1: If Vj = 0, then f j
Vj = f j
0.
δjf j
Vj −gj
1 = δjf j
0 −gj
1 = gj
0, and
δjP(f j
Vj) −hj
1 = δjP(f j
0) −hj
1 = hj
0. It is concluded that for j = 1, . . . , Ψ,
Eq. (1) holds.
16

Case 2: Let Vj = 1. Then, f j
Vj = f j
1. Hence,
δj
 sID −P(f j
1) + P(0)

−G(gj
1, f j
1) −hj
1
= δj
 P(UID) −P(f j
1) + P(0)

−G(gj
1, f j
1) −hj
1
= δj
 P(f j
0 + f j
1) −P(f j
1) + P(0)

−G(gj
1, f j
1) −hj
1
as UID = f j
0 + f j
1
= δj
 P(f j
0) + G(f j
0, f j
1)

−G(gj
1, f j
1) −hj
1
= G(δjf j
0 −gj
1, f j
1) + δjP(f j
0) −hj
1
= G(gj
0, f j
1) + hj
0
Thus, for j = 1, . . . , Ψ, Eq. (2) holds.
5.3. Post-Quantum Multivariate Digital Signature (PQ-MISS)
This
section
introduces
the
Post-Quantum
Verifiable
Multivariate
Identity-Based Signature Scheme (PQ-MISS), which enhances the standard
MISS architecture to support aggregate signing and verification. The scheme
is designed for use in distributed and constrained environments where multi-
ple signers must produce verifiable multivariate signatures that can be com-
pactly aggregated by a trusted aggregator (Agg).
The PQ-MISS scheme consists of five main algorithms: KeyGen for
key generation of all users and the aggregator, LSSign for local signing by
individual signers, LSVer for verification of each individual signature by the
aggregator, LASign for aggregation of valid signatures into a compact group
signature, and LAVer for final verification of the aggregate signature by an
external verifier.
The system involves a Key Generation Center (KGC), n individual sign-
ers, and a central aggregator (Agg). The KGC is a trusted authority that
holds the master secret key (Msk) and master public key (Mpk). It is re-
sponsible for generating key pairs for all parties in the system and securely
distributing them.
Each signer and the aggregator are assigned unique identities from the
domain {0, 1}∗, and their corresponding secret and public keys are derived
using the multivariate structure
P = S ◦F ◦T : Fn
q →Fm
q ,
where S, F, and T are affine and central transformations over Fq. The KGC
computes each user’s secret key UID as
UID = P −1(sID),
17

where sID is the hashed identity output using a one-way collision-resistant
function.
In the following subsections, we describe the specific steps involved in each
component of PQ-MISS. These include detailed procedures for key assign-
ment, signer operations, multi-signature verification, and secure aggregate
signature generation and validation. Notations with their descriptions are
listed in Table 2.
5.3.1. KeyGen
The Key Generation Center (KGC) performs the following steps to ini-
tialize the PQ-MISS system:
• Selects a secret key sk = UID and defines the corresponding public key
as pk = S ◦F ◦T : Fn
q →Fm
q .
• Chooses (n + 1) values from Fn
q , denoted as (s1, s2, . . . , sn) and sAgg
ID ,
corresponding to the identities of each signer i = 1, 2, . . . , n and the
aggregator IDAgg.
• For each ith signer and the aggregator, where i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} ∪
{IDAgg}, applies a one-way collision-resistant hash function
¯H
:
{0, 1}∗→Fm
q to compute sID = ¯H(Msk, ID).
• Computes the corresponding private key for each participant as UID =
P −1(sID) ∈Fn
q , while the public key for all entities is pk = S ◦F ◦T.
As a result, each signer and the aggregator receives their own key pair
(ski, pki), derived from their identity and the system-wide parameters.
5.3.2. LSSign
Each signer i holds a private–public key pair (ski, pki). To sign a message
mi ∈{0, 1}∗, the signer executes the LSSign algorithm as follows.
First, the signer computes:
ci = Hash1(pki∥mi)
using a cryptographically secure hash function.
For each j = 1, . . . , Ψ, the signer randomly selects:
f j
0, gj
0 ∈R Fn
q ,
hj
0 ∈R Fm
q .
18

Table 2: Symbol descriptions for the proposed PQ-MISS scheme
Symbol
Description
FDj
jth Fog device
SDpj
jth FANET device group
Agg
Aggregator
DRi
ith FANET device
CSk
kth semi-trusted cloud server
P2P CS
Peer-to-peer cloud server network
KGC
Key Generation Center (trusted control room)
Msk, Mpk
Master secret/public key of KGC
Fq
Finite field with q elements
i
Integer in {1, 2, . . . , n} ∪{IDAgg}
ski, pki
Secret/public key of DRi
mi
Message signed by DRi
σ
Signature of DRi
pkAggj
Public key of aggregator
skAggj
Secret key of aggregator
m′
Message signed by aggregator
ASigAggj
Aggregate signature
H(·)
Collision-resistant hash function from Rp to R1
p
CTSX
Current timestamp from X
∆T
Maximum permissible transmission delay
∥
Data concatenation
ˆs
Security parameter
sID
Identity-derived value of signer
sAgg
Identity-derived value of aggregator
It then computes:
f j
1 = UID −f j
0
19

and generates two commitments for each round:
βj
0 = Commit(f j
0, gj
0, hj
0),
βj
1 = Commit(f j
1, G(gj
0, f j
1) + hj
0).
The commitments are arranged as:
Comm = (β1
0, β1
1, . . . , βΨ
0 , βΨ
1 ).
A challenge vector is then computed:
(δ1, . . . , δΨ) = Hash2(ci∥Comm) ∈FΨ
q .
For each j = 1, . . . , Ψ, the responses are calculated:
gj
1 = δjf j
0 −gj
0,
hj
1 = δjP(f j
0) −hj
0.
These are collected into the first response sequence:
Res1 = (g1
1, h1
1, . . . , gΨ
1 , hΨ
1 ).
A second challenge vector is generated as:
(V1, . . . , VΨ) = Hash3(ci∥Comm∥Res1) ∈{0, 1}Ψ.
The second response sequence is:
Res2 = (f 1
V1, . . . , f Ψ
VΨ).
Finally, the signer outputs the signature on mi as:
Sign(mi) = (Comm, Res1, Res2).
5.3.3. LSVer
To verify a signature φ = Sign(mi) for a message mi from signer i, the
aggregator (Agg) proceeds as follows.
It computes the identity hash sID = Hash(ID) and the challenge seed
ci = Hash1(pki∥mi). Based on these values, it derives the challenge vectors:
(δ1, . . . , δΨ) = Hash2(ci∥Comm) ∈FΨ
q
(1)
(V1, . . . , VΨ) = Hash3(ci∥Comm∥Res1) ∈{0, 1}Ψ
(2)
The signature φ is parsed into:
20

• Comm = (β1
0, β1
1, . . . , βΨ
0 , βΨ
1 )
• Res1 = (g1
1, h1
1, . . . , gΨ
1 , hΨ
1 )
• Res2 = (f 1
V1, . . . , f Ψ
VΨ)
For each round j = 1, . . . , Ψ, the aggregator checks the following verifica-
tion condition:
If Vj = 0:
βj
0
?= Commit

f j
Vj, δjf j
Vj −gj
1, δjP(f j
Vj) −hj
1

If Vj = 1:
βj
1
?= Commit

fj
Vj, δj(sID −P(fj
Vj) + P(0))
−G(gj
1, fj
Vj) −hj
1

(3)
The signature is accepted if all such conditions hold for every round j =
1, . . . , Ψ, i.e.,
Signature Verification(Mpk, mi, φ, ID) = 1
Otherwise, the signature is rejected:
Signature Verification(Mpk, mi, φ, ID) = 0
5.3.4. LASign
After verifying individual 

[…middle truncated for length…]

nd its associated fog node FDj within a group SDpj.
When SDpj contains nDR devices, the Control Room (CR), acting as the Key
Generation Center (KGC), is responsible for completing their registration
prior to deployment.
In the case of FANET device enrollment, for each device DRi, where
i = 1, 2, . . . , nDR, the CR executes the KeyGen algorithm to generate a secret
key ski = uIDi and a corresponding public key pki = S ◦F ◦T : Fn
q →Fm
q . A
unique identifier IDDRi is assigned to each device and, together with the key
pair (ski, pki), is preloaded into the device’s secure memory. The CR then
makes pki publicly available.
For fog node registration, FDj first selects an identity IDAgg
j
and se-
curely transmits it to the CR. Acting as the KGC, the CR again runs the
KeyGen algorithm to produce the fog node’s secret key skAgg
j
= U Agg
IDj and its
public key pkAgg
j
= S ◦F ◦T. These credentials are securely returned to FDj
and stored in its secure database in the form {IDAgg
j
, (skAgg
j
, pkAgg
j
)}, while
the public key pkAgg
j
is also published for system-wide use.
25

6.2. Data Collection
Each FANET device DRi in a group SDpj performs data collection over
a defined time window as follows:
Step 1: The device DRi generates a current timestamp CTSDRi and
prepares a message:
mi = {IDDRi, IDAgg
j
, (RTSStart, RTSEnd), DataDRi, CTSDRi}
It then computes a signature SSigmi = LSSign(ski, mi) where ski = UIDi.
Here, RTS refers to the start and end time range of the sensed data.
Step 2: DRi forms a transaction:
TXDRi = {mi, SSigmi, pki}
and sends the message MsgDRi = {TXDRi} to the corresponding FDj over a
public channel.
6.3. Data Aggregation
The fog node FDj collects messages from its local FANET group and
processes them as follows:
Step 1: Upon receiving MsgDRi from device i at time TSDRi, FDj verifies
freshness using:
|CTSDRi −TSDRi| < ∆T
If valid, the message is accepted. Otherwise, it is discarded.
Step 2: FDj runs the LSVer algorithm on mi using public key pki. If
the signature is valid, the transaction TXDRi is accepted.
Step 3: For all valid transactions {TX1
DRi, TX2
DRi, . . . , TXtn
DRi}, the fog
node executes LASign using skAgg
j
to compute the aggregate signature:
ASigAgg
j
= LASign({(Sigk
mi, mk
i )}tn
k=1)
It then sends the aggregation message:
xw = {TX1
DRi, . . . , TXtn
DRi, ASigAgg
j
, pkAgg
j
}
to the Cloud server CSk over an open channel.
26

6.4. Including Key Management during Addition and Verification of Blocks
into Blockchain
The proposed key management method aids in securing data collection
during block creation in the private blockchain. In fog-enabled FANET ap-
plications, the data sensed from FANET devices are kept confidential and
private to users. Sensitive data must not be publicly available. Further-
more, the blockchain ensures the security of data such that immutability,
transparency, and decentralization of data are well-preserved.
Notation Clarification: In this section, we unify the terminology used
across the fog and blockchain layers. The terms fog server (FSk), fog node,
and fog device (FDj) are used interchangeably and refer to the same entity
responsible for aggregating and forwarding data from FANET devices. For
consistency, FSk corresponds to the fog device FDj introduced earlier. Sim-
ilarly, GWNj and Grj denote the same FANET group previously defined as
SDpj. The public and private keys of fog entities are represented uniformly
as (pkAggj, skAggj). All transaction notations TXw correspond to validated
device transactions TXDRi generated in the data aggregation phase. The
proposed key management method aids in securing data collection during
block creation.
The creation and operation of the blockchain involve the following steps:
Step 1: Initially, data securely transmitted from FANET devices (SDi)
to corresponding fog nodes (GWNj) in group (Grj) are organized into several
transactions (TXw), where:
TXw = {Sensed Data, ID of SDi (RIDSDi), Timestamp (TSTXw)}
These transactions are securely forwarded to fog server FSk of GWNj, en-
crypted based on public key PubFSk.
Step 2: FSk gathers and encrypts transactions:
ETXw = EPubF Sk[TXw]
and builds a Partial Block (ParBlk) from nt encrypted transactions (ETXw).
Then, Merkle Tree Root (MTRBlk) is determined based on nt ETXw and
Timestamp for Block formation (TSBlk), type of CPS application (AppType),
Block Owner (IDFSk), Owner’s public key (PubFSk), and ECDSA signature
(SigBlk) on message:
m = h(TSBlk ∥MTRBlk ∥AppType ∥IDFSk ∥PubFSk ∥SigBlk)
27

Figure 4: FullBlk For Various Transactions
Encrypted transactions (ETXw, 1 ≤w ≤nt) are signed using the private key
of FSk (PriFSk).
Step 3: Each FSk forwards the ParBlk to the associated CSs (CSl) en-
crypted using the public key of CSl (PubCSl). CSl includes Block Version
(VerBlk), Previous Hash Block (PHBlk), and Current Hash Block (CHBlk)
with the data from PHBlk and ParBlk. FullBlk is presented in Figure 4.
Step 4: FullBlk is verified and included in BC’s private blockchain using
the Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT) consensus algorithm [29]
in the P2P CS network. Algorithm 1 shows the verification and addition of
blocks.
As shown in the network model, there are several companies that work
together. Assume that fog servers along with FANET devices are in company
A. CSs are in company B. AI-based Big Data analytics is performed by
company C. The PBFT consensus scheme, which is voting-based, is used for
verifying and including a FullBlk in the P2P CSs network. Incentives for fog
servers and CSs for acting as miners and constructing blocks in the blockchain
are not considered.
Furthermore, ParBlk includes encrypted transactions
ETXw = EPubF Sk[TXw], MTRBlk, and ECDSA signature (SigBlk). ParBlk is
sent to the corresponding CS (CSl) which verifies the signature.
ParBlk is tested by checking whether MTR on encrypted transactions
28

(ETXw) matches the MTRBlk stored in the block. If valid, CSl confirms the
integrity of ParBlk. Furthermore, ETXw and SigBlk cannot be determined
by any CSs, including CSl and an opponent, as it requires the private key
(PriFSk) of Fog Server (FSk). CSl includes previous and current block hashes
to ParBlk to convert it into FullBlk. The proposed mechanism focuses on
issues related to the security and privacy of outsourced data.
Algorithm 1 Verification and Addition of Blocks
Require: FullBlk; {(PriCSℓ, PubCSℓ)}; nf
// number of faulty nodes in
P2P CS network
Ensure: Commitment and inclusion of FullBlk in every ledger
1: L ←leader chosen via Round Robin (RR) policy
2: L
produces
timestamp
TSL
and
broadcasts
⟨FullBlk, EPubCS[Vreq, TSL] , TSL⟩to all CSℓover a public channel
3: for all CSℓin parallel do
4:
verify TSL
5:
if valid then
6:
(Vreq, TS′
L) ←DPriCSℓ[EPubCS[Vreq, TSL]]
7:
verify TS′
L against local time
8:
verify MTRBlk, SigBlk, and CHBlk in FullBlk
9:
send

EPubL[ Vres, TSCSℓ], TSCSℓ

to L
// Vres: voting response
10:
end if
11: end for
12: Vc ←0
// valid-vote counter
13: for all responses

EPubL[ Vres, TSCSℓ], TSCSℓ

do
14:
verify TSCSℓ
15:
Vres ←DPriL[EPubL[ Vres, TSCSℓ]]
16:
if Vres is valid then
17:
Vc ←Vc + 1
18:
end if
19: end for
20: if Vc > 2 nf + 1 then
21:
L broadcasts commit for FullBlk
22:
each CSℓ(including L) appends FullBlk to its ledger
23: end if
29

6.5. Protected Prediction using Blockchain based on AI
Data from transactions stored in the blockchain are heterogeneous in na-
ture, containing information about FANET device parameters such as loca-
tion, speed, and altitude, as well as communication metrics including latency
and signal strength. To enable effective AI/ML-based analysis, this data is
preprocessed to construct structured datasets suitable for training and pre-
diction tasks. The blockchain serves as a secure storage layer, ensuring that
the data remains immutable, transparent, and accessible only to authorized
components of the system.
During simulation, FANET data is continuously collected and transmitted
to blockchain nodes for secure storage. These data streams are subsequently
accessed by AI models, which process them to generate predictions that
inform decision-making within the network. This hybrid approach not only
guarantees secure data handling but also leverages AI to provide meaningful
insights while maintaining efficiency under the resource constraints of ns-3.
In the context of AI/ML analytics, transactional data recorded on the
blockchain plays a critical role in determining system performance.
Two
distinct datasets are used: one for training the parameters of nodes, and
another for testing the routing tables.
In this work, a Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) model is employed to predict the collected data, enhancing
both the security and privacy of the hybrid FANET–fog–blockchain network.
This integration of blockchain and AI thus supports resilient predictions and
secure, intelligent decision-making.
6.6. Dynamic Addition of Nodes
To support scalability in FANET environments, the proposed system en-
ables the dynamic addition of new devices after initial deployment. Consider
the case of deploying a new FANET device SDnew
i
into an existing group Grj
managed by fog node FNj. The Key Generation Center (KGC) first selects a
unique identity IDnew
SDi and a corresponding registration timestamp RTSnew
SDi.
It then executes the KeyGen procedure to generate the device’s secret–public
key pair, where the private key is defined as Prinew
SDi = U new
ID and the public
key is given by Pubnew
SDi = S ◦F ◦T : Fn
q →Fm
q .
The Control Room (CR), acting as the KGC, securely loads the tuple
{Prinew
SDi, Pubnew
SDi, IDnew
SDi} into the memory of SDnew
i
prior to deployment
within Grj. Simultaneously, the public key Pubnew
SDi is published to the system
directory, making the new device immediately recognizable and verifiable by
other entities in the network. This procedure ensures that newly added nodes
30

are securely integrated into the existing FANET–fog–blockchain ecosystem
without compromising system integrity.
7. Performance Evaluation
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed scheme, extensive simula-
tions are conducted on the NS-3.25 network simulator under a fog-enabled
FANET scenario. The evaluation quantifies cryptographic overhead, scalabil-
ity under message aggregation, and the efficiency of blockchain integration,
with comparisons against two state-of-the-art schemes: MV-MSS [25] and
LBAS [26]. The simulation parameters are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3: Simulation parameters
Parameter
Value
Simulator
NS-3.25
Simulation area (width × depth)
1000 × 1000 m
Number of FANET devices
50
Number of fog devices
10
Number of cloud servers
5 to 25
Packet size
100–10,000 bytes
External libraries used
NFL [30], OpenSSL [31], Crypto++ [32]
Hash algorithm
SHA-3 (standard)
Protocol
PQ-MISS
Transmission range
100 m
Simulation time
100 s
We take into account principal performance indicators that reflect cryp-
tographic as well as network-level efficiency. (1) Signing time reflects the
latency of generating digital signature at each UAV, showing the computa-
tional load on resource-constrained nodes. (2) Verification time reflects the
processing delay faced by fog nodes or cloud servers when verifying indi-
vidual or combined signatures, directly influencing real-time authentication
and throughput.
(3) Aggregate signing and verification times reflect the
scalability of the scheme under the processing of multiple messages simul-
taneously at the fog layer, an indispensable parameter for swarm-level data
31

agglomeration. (4) Total computation cost is the overall processing over-
head including signature generation, verification, and blockchain processing
across all nodes; this reflects the end-to-end efficiency of PQ-MISS’s imple-
mentation within the blockchain-based fog architecture.
These indicators
collectively analyze the trade-off among security intensification, latency, and
scalability, and illustrate the improved performance offered by the proposed
PQ-MISS scheme vis-à-vis current post-quantum schemes like MV-MSS [25]
and LBAS [26]. The measured metrics collectively demonstrate the role of
the multivariate structure and aggregate signature optimization in reduc-
ing computational complexity, thereby enhancing real-time performance in
fog-enabled FANETs.
Figure 5 presents the results for signing and verification times in both
single-message and aggregated-message scenarios. For single messages (Fig-
ures 5a and 5b), PQ-MISS achieves lower overhead than MV-MSS [25] and
LBAS [26] across all packet sizes. At the maximum packet size of 10,000
bytes, PQ-MISS reduces signing time by 35% compared to MV-MSS [25]
and 47.2% compared to LBAS [26], while verification delay is reduced by
29.4% and 54.8%, respectively. These improvements underscore PQ-MISS’s
suitability for latency-sensitive UAV applications where rapid authentication
is critical.
For aggregated operations (Figures 5c and 5d), PQ-MISS maintains its
advantage as the batch size increases. When 100 messages are aggregated,
PQ-MISS requires only 0.65 s for signing, whereas MV-MSS [25] and LBAS
[26] require 0.83 s and 0.99 s, corresponding to improvements of 21.7% and
34.3%.
Similar gains are observed for aggregated verification, confirming
that PQ-MISS scales efficiently with aggregation and supports fog devices
processing large volumes of UAV traffic.
The computational efficiency of PQ-MISS in blockchain-enabled scenarios
is shown in Figure 6. Figure 6a illustrates the total computation cost as the
number of blockchain nodes increases from 5 to 25, with each block limited
to 30 transactions and a maximum of 25 blocks overall. PQ-MISS achieves
lower costs compared to the baseline schemes; at 25 nodes, the cost is 102
s compared to 109 s for MV-MSS [25] and 116 s for LBAS [26], reflecting
improvements of 6.4% and 12.1%, respectively.
Figure 6b evaluates total computation cost against the number of trans-
actions, ranging from 30 to 80. PQ-MISS outperforms the baseline methods
in this scenario as well. At 80 transactions, PQ-MISS incurs a cost of 64
s, while MV-MSS [25] and LBAS [26] require 71 s and 82 s, respectively.
32

(a) Packet size vs. single message signing time
(b) Packet size vs. single message verification time
(c) Aggregated messages vs. aggregated signing time (d) Aggregated messages vs.
aggregated verification
time
Figure 5: Signing and verification times for single and aggregated messages.
This corresponds to reductions of 9.9% relative to MV-MSS [25] and 21.9%
compared to LBAS [26]. The results across all experiments confirm that PQ-
MISS not only reduces computation costs but also scales more efficiently as
network size and workload increase, making it a strong candidate for secure
33

(a) Number of blockchain nodes (P2P nodes) vs. total
computation cost
(b) Number of transactions vs. total computation cost
Figure 6: Computational efficiency of PQ-MISS in blockchain-enabled scenarios.
and resource-constrained UAV/FANET environments.
The comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that PQ-MISS consistently
outperforms existing schemes across multiple performance metrics, show-
ing significant improvements in both individual signature operations and
aggregate processing scenarios, while maintaining superior scalability in
blockchain-integrated environments.
While the presented results demonstrate the efficiency and scalability
of PQ-MISS, several limitations should be acknowledged. The simulations
assumed a fixed mobility model and did not explicitly evaluate energy con-
sumption, which is critical in UAV operations. Additionally, the experiments
were conducted on a moderate-scale testbed (50 UAVs, 10 fog devices, and
up to 25 blockchain nodes); larger deployments may introduce further com-
munication and synchronization overhead. Furthermore, the integration of
AI-assisted prediction components, discussed in Section 6, was not bench-
marked here and will be explored in future work. Addressing these aspects
represents an important direction for extending this study.
34

8. Conclusion and future work
In this work, we proposed a novel Post-Quantum Multivariate Digital
Signature Scheme (PQ-MISS), which builds upon a secure MPKC signature
scheme and a 5-Pass identification protocol. The scheme was tailored for
fog-enabled FANET environments, where UAVs act as individual signers and
fog devices (FDs) serve as aggregators. Aggregated messages and their corre-
sponding signatures are verified by cloud servers operating within a peer-to-
peer network, which subsequently form and validate blocks on the blockchain.
This integration ensures immutability, decentralization, and transparency
across the system.
Comprehensive security analysis demonstrates that PQ-MISS is resistant
to a broad spectrum of threats, including quantum-capable adversaries. Per-
formance evaluation using NS-3 simulations confirmed the efficiency of our
design, measuring computational costs for both individual and aggregate
signature generation and verification at the UAV, FD, and cloud server lev-
els. The results validate the practical feasibility of the proposed approach in
resource-constrained environments.
In future work, we plan to extend PQ-MISS to incorporate adaptive mo-
bility and energy-aware models, perform large-scale experimental validations,
and fully integrate and benchmark the AI-driven prediction modules for
real-time anomaly detection and trust management. These enhancements
will complete the transition toward a fully intelligent, quantum-resilient, and
self-optimizing FANET framework.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Sufian Al Majmaiea: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, For-
mal analysis, Investigation, Writing – Original Draft, Visualization. Ghazal
Ghajari: Supervision, Validation, Writing – Review & Editing, Resources.
Niraj Prasad Bhatta: Software, Validation, Writing – review and editing,
Data curation. Fathi Amsaad: Project administration, Funding acquisi-
tion, Review & Editing, Technical guidance.