X-NegoBox: An Explainable Privacy-Budget
Negotiation Framework for Secure Peer-to-Peer
Energy Data Exchange
Poushali Sengupta, Sabita Maharjan, Frank Eliassen, Yan Zhang*
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
*University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Abstract—The decentralization of modern energy systems is
transforming consumers into prosumers who continuously ex-
change data with aggregators, peers, and market operators.
While such data is essential for peer-to-peer trading, demand
response, and distributed forecasting, it can reveal sensitive
household patterns, creating significant privacy risks. Most ex-
isting data-sharing mechanisms rely on fixed policies or pre-
determined differential-privacy budgets, limiting their ability to
adapt to variations in reliability, data sensitivity, and intended
purpose across requests. As a result, prosumers rarely receive
explanations for why a data request is accepted, rejected, or
modified, weakening trust and limiting meaningful participation
in peer-to-peer data exchange. To address these limitations, we
introduce an explainable negotiation framework that enables
adaptive privacy budgeting and transparent decision-making.
In the proposed framework, each prosumer’s data is managed
locally within a Private DataBox, where raw data remain confined
and are never directly shared. Incoming requests are processed by
an Autonomous Privacy-Budget Negotiation Protocol (APBNP),
which dynamically determines an optimal differential-privacy
budget by accounting for trust, feature sensitivity, declared
purpose, historical sharing behavior, and risk-aware pricing.
When a request cannot be accepted as-is, APBNP generates
privacy-preserving counter-offers, such as reduced resolution or
shorter duration. To ensure transparency, X-NegoBox includes
an Explainable Agreement Layer (X-Contract) that produces
human- and machine-readable explanations for acceptance, re-
jection, or modification. After agreement, requester code executes
locally inside the DataBox sandbox, and only sanitized outputs
are released. All negotiation and optimization steps execute
locally within a secure computation environment, while execution
authorization is distributed using threshold secret sharing. Exper-
iments on realistic energy-market settings show that X-NegoBox
reduces privacy leakage, increases acceptance rates, and provides
interpretable justification for decisions.
Index Terms—Privacy, Differential Privacy, Smart Contracts,
Peer-to-Peer Energy Systems, Explainable AI, Data Sharing.
I. INTRODUCTION
The reliability and efficiency of decentralized energy sys-
tems increasingly depend on fine-grained data related to
electricity consumption, generation, and flexibility in market
operations [1], [2]. While operationally valuable, such data
can reveal sensitive household patterns, including occupancy,
appliance usage, and lifestyle characteristics [3], [4].1 Ex-
{poushals,sabita,frank}@ifi.uio.no, yanzhang@ieee.org
1Examples include presence inference, appliance-level behavior, and routine
detection.
isting privacy-preserving approaches, such as static access-
control policies, fixed differential-privacy (DP) budgets [5],
or centralized clean rooms [6], rely on pre-defined configura-
tions and apply uniform privacy settings across heterogeneous
data-access requests, despite differences in data sensitivity,
requester intent, and usage context. Moreover, prosumers
typically receive no clear explanation for why a request is
accepted, rejected, or modified, limiting transparency and trust
in participatory energy systems [7]. Advanced metering infras-
tructure (AMI) and home energy management systems enable
prosumers to participate in peer-to-peer energy exchange and
local balancing [8]. Such participation requires continuous
data exchange, including load curves and generation fore-
casts [9], which can expose sensitive household routines and
socioeconomic attributes [10], [11]. As data is shared with
aggregators, peers, and service providers, concerns regarding
privacy protection and regulatory compliance intensify [12].
Fine-grained energy data (e.g., smart meter readings) can re-
veal sensitive household patterns such as occupancy, appliance
usage, and behavioral habits, enabling inference attacks and
potential misuse (e.g., surveillance or security threats). In peer-
to-peer energy trading, repeated data exchange amplifies these
risks, motivating adaptive, context-aware privacy mechanisms
beyond static policies.
Existing solutions broadly fall into three categories: access
control with static rules [13], differential privacy with fixed
budgets [14], [15], and data clean rooms that centralize sen-
sitive data [16].2 However, they fail to accommodate varying
privacy preferences across requesters and purposes [17], [18].
Supporting peer-to-peer energy interactions therefore requires
an adaptive, bidirectional negotiation mechanism that dynami-
cally adjusts disclosure parameters (e.g., temporal resolution or
reporting duration), rather than relying on static policies [19],
[20]. Without such mechanisms, prosumers have limited ability
to understand or control cumulative privacy-budget consump-
tion across repeated requests [21]. To address these challenges,
we introduce X-NegoBox, a distributed, privacy-preserving
framework that enables adaptive control of data disclosure
while keeping all raw data confined within a local Private
DataBox. Incoming requests are evaluated by an Autonomous
2These approaches differ in enforcement and threat models but share static
disclosure assumptions.
arXiv:2604.24326v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

Privacy-Budget Negotiation Protocol (APBNP), which allo-
cates per-request DP budgets based on request parameters and
remaining privacy allowance [22]. Requests operate only on
derived data (e.g., aggregates or coarse-grained profiles), while
raw measurements remain local. When a request cannot be
satisfied, APBNP generates privacy-preserving counteroffers
by adjusting disclosure parameters. The contributions of this
work are:
1) An
explainable,
autonomous
privacy-budget
negotiation
framework for prosumer-to-prosumer energy data exchange.
2) The APBNP protocol for adaptive, per-request DP allocation.
3) X-Contract, an explainability layer providing interpretable
justification for contract decisions.
4) A secure local execution sandbox enabling “run code, not
data” interactions [23].
5) An evaluation on realistic energy-market workloads demon-
strating improved privacy preservation, trust, and contract
acceptance.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents background and motivation. Section III introduces the
system model. Section IV details APBNP. Section V describes
X-Contract. Section VI discusses sandboxed execution. Sec-
tion VII evaluates X-NegoBox, and Section VIII concludes the
paper.
II. STAKEHOLDERS AND ROLES
X-NegoBox operates in a prosumer-controlled environment
involving five key stakeholders. A prosumer is a household
or local energy actor that owns sensitive energy data (e.g.,
load curves, PV generation, flexibility bids, and appliance-
level signatures) and retains full data ownership. A Pri-
vate DataBox is a prosumer-controlled computation enclave
deployed at the household or trusted edge that stores raw
data locally, enforces privacy and contract constraints, and
guarantees that raw data never leaves the box. A requester
is an external entity, such as another prosumer, an aggregator,
a forecasting service, or a market operator, seeking access
to derived energy data for a declared purpose (e.g., billing,
forecasting, or peer-to-peer trading). A contract agent is
a lightweight orchestration component within the DataBox
that validates requests, coordinates the Autonomous Privacy-
Budget Negotiation Protocol (APBNP), generates counter-
offers when required, and invokes the explainable agreement
layer (X-Contract). Finally, an execution sandbox provides an
isolated runtime for executing requester-supplied code under
strict contract and privacy constraints, injecting differential-
privacy noise and releasing only sanitized outputs.
Figure 1 provides a high-level view of how data-access
requests are processed within X-NegoBox, from the initial
contract proposal to privacy-budget allocation and decision ex-
planation, without exposing raw household data. The workflow
proceeds as follows:
1) Contract Proposal: A requester submits a contract spec-
ifying data fields, temporal granularity, duration, intended
Requester
(Aggregator or Prosumer)
PRIVATE DATABOX
1. Contract Agent
Validates & Parses Proposal
Checks syntax, intent,
and resource needs
2. APBNP
Negotiates ϵ, δ
3. X-Contract
Explainable Decision Layer
4. Execution Sandbox
Isolated code execution
+ Differential Privacy noise injection
Runs requester-supplied code safely
Sanitized Output
Differentially Private Results
(ϵ, δ)-DP guaranteed
RAW
DATA
1. Contract Proposal
(Code + Query
+ Proposed ϵ)
2. Validated Proposal
3. Allocated Privacy Budget
Accepted / Rejected
4. Approved Code + Budget
5. Noisy/Aggregated
Results
NO RAW DATA EVER LEAVES
Rejection + Counter-proposal
Reject or Renegotiate
Household Feedback
(Accept / Modify / Reject)
Natural Language
Explanation &
Reasoning Trace
Private Raw Data
(Accessible ONLY
inside sandbox)
Fig. 1: X-NegoBox architecture enforcing a secure “run code, not
data” model, where contracts are negotiated, explained, and executed
locally with differential privacy, and only sanitized outputs are
released.
purpose, maximum acceptable noise, and expected utility.3
2) APBNP Decision Process: Upon receiving a data-access
request, the DataBox evaluates request-specific parameters
such as the requested data granularity, temporal resolution,
reporting duration, and the remaining privacy allowance.
Based on this evaluation, the Autonomous Privacy-Budget
Negotiation Protocol (APBNP) determines an appropriate
differential-privacy budget ε⋆and selects one of three out-
comes: approval, modification, or denial. APBNP proceeds
in six phases: (i) authenticate and validate the encrypted
request, (ii) compute sensitivity, trust, and purpose scores,
(iii) optimize the privacy budget ε⋆, (iv) check feasibil-
ity constraints, (v) generate a counter-offer or rejection
if needed, and (vi) authorize release via threshold key
reconstruction followed by differentially private execution.
Approval occurs if the request fits within the remaining
privacy budget; modification produces a counter-offer by
adjusting disclosure parameters (e.g., reduced temporal
resolution or duration); denial is issued when no feasible
configuration satisfies privacy constraints..
3) X-Contract Explanation: The system produces a transpar-
ent explanation detailing the decision rationale, privacy–
utility trade-offs, and actionable guidance for revising the
request. An Explainable Agreement Layer (X-Contract)
generates human- and machine-readable justifications for
each decision [21]. After agreement, the requester code
executes locally in a secure sandbox, ensuring that only
DP-sanitized outputs are released [24].
4) Local Execution: After agreement, requester code is vali-
dated and executed in the DataBox sandbox. Only contract-
compliant, DP-sanitized outputs are returned.
Privacy Objectives and Operational Safeguards:
The X-
NegoBox architecture is designed with privacy as a primary
operational objective, supported by safeguards that regulate
3These parameters define both the disclosure scope and the acceptable
privacy–utility trade-off from the requester’s perspective.

how data-access requests are evaluated, adapted, and executed
within the DataBox. Rather than exposing raw data, the
system limits disclosure to privacy-preserving outputs and
enforces constraints throughout the request lifecycle. Data-
access requests may involve repeated interactions over time,
which can lead to unintended information leakage if not
properly controlled. For example, attempts to infer sensitive
household attributes, such as occupancy or appliance usage,
from released outputs are mitigated through adaptive privacy-
budget allocation and controlled output granularity. To pre-
vent reconstruction of exact values across successive queries,
the system monitors cumulative privacy loss and dynami-
cally adjusts or restricts further disclosure when necessary.
TABLE I: Adaptive X-Contract param-
eterization across energy data requests.
Param.
Base
Settlement
Forecast
DR
Data type
HH load
Agg. load
Smoothed agg. Load + flex.
Resolution
15 min
1 h
30 min
5 min
Window
30 d (hist.) 60 d (hist.)
14 d roll.
Event
DP ε
4.0
2.0
3.0
5.5
Output
Aggregates
Billing
Stats
Events
Mode
Periodic
One-shot
Periodic
On-demand
Filters
–
–
–
Peaks
All data processing is
performed within a se-
cure local sandbox that
isolates execution from
external
access.
The
sandbox validates sub-
mitted code, restricts
system operations, and prevents unauthorized data extraction,
thereby ensuring that privacy guarantees are consistently en-
forced. The X-NegoBox architecture focuses on five key goals:
• Preserving
privacy
by
ensuring
data
sharing
meets
differential-privacy standards.
• Automating privacy-budget negotiations for ease of use.
• Providing clear explanations for contract decisions to build
trust.
• Maintaining logs for accountability and dispute resolution.
• Ensuring that requesters follow contractual guidelines for
data outputs.
Together, these elements, including APBNP, X-Contract, and
the local execution sandbox, facilitate a ”run code, not data”
model, enabling secure and transparent data exchanges among
prosumers while laying the groundwork for negotiation logic
and explainability.
III. AUTONOMOUS PRIVACY-BUDGET NEGOTIATION
PROTOCOL (APBNP)
APBNP determines whether a contract is approved, rejected, or
modified by computing an optimal privacy budget ε⋆that bal-
ances privacy risk, expected utility, trust, sensitivity, purpose,
and historical budget consumption. This section formalizes
the notation, optimization criteria, scoring components, and
negotiation algorithm. Let requester i and data owner j be
prosumers. A contract specifies a feature set x, time window
w, temporal resolution r, and purpose p. The sensitivity of x
is denoted by Sx, trust by Tij, and purpose compatibility by
P(p). Let Hj denote prosumer j’s cumulative privacy-budget
consumption. Functions U(ε) and R(ε) represent the expected
utility and privacy risk under budget ε, respectively, while
C(ε) captures the associated economic cost. The resulting
optimal budget is denoted ε⋆. To regulate the privacy budget
offered to a requester, X–NegoBox first quantifies the inherent
privacy risk associated with the features included in the
request. We formalize this using a sensitivity score, which
aggregates feature-level risk weights into a single scalar.
Definition 3.1 (Feature Sensitivity Weight): Let f denote a fea-
ture category included in a data-access request x. Each feature
is assigned a sensitivity coefficient αf ∈[0, 1] that reflects its
inherent privacy risk. Larger values indicate a higher likelihood
of revealing personal, behavioural, or appliance-level patterns.
Typical values used throughout this work are: αloc
=
1.0, αapp = 0.7, αload = 0.4, αagg = 0.2.
Definition 3.2 (Sensitivity Score): For a request x containing
a set of features F(x), the sensitivity score is defined as
Sx =
X
f∈F(x)
αf.
(1)
A higher Sx indicates that the request targets more privacy-
critical aspects of the household profile.Consequently, a higher
sensitivity score reduces the set of privacy budgets ε that
can be safely allocated to a request. Rather than directly
rejecting such requests, the negotiation engine adapts the
contract parameters to remain within acceptable privacy limits.
Concretely, this adaptation may involve lowering the temporal
or spatial granularity of the data, increasing the amount of
noise injected into the released outputs, or restructuring the
request into an alternative form that exposes less sensitive
information. Sensitivity scoring therefore serves as an initial
control mechanism that converts high-level semantic descrip-
tions of requested data (e.g., appliance-level usage or location-
related features) into explicit quantitative constraints that guide
privacy-budget allocation and contract reformulation.
Beyond the intrinsic sensitivity of the requested features, the
willingness of a data owner to share information also depends
on the historical relationship with the requester. We model this
with a contract-level trust score, which aggregates behavioural
evidence accumulated across previous interactions.
Definition 3.3 (Trust Score): Let i denote a requester and j
the data owner. The trust score Tij quantifies the historical
reliability of requester i with respect to owner j and is
computed as,
Tij = β1Nsucc
ij
+ β2Qqual
ij
+ β3Amatch
ij
,
(2)
where each component captures a distinct behavioural signal.
The terms in Eq. (2) are defined as follows: N succ
ij : number
of successfully completed contracts between requester i and
owner j, indicating behavioral consistency. Qqual
ij : a metric
evaluating the compliance, correctness, and timeliness of out-
puts from requester i. Amatch
ij
measures how closely actual
data use aligns with the declared purpose, penalizing misuse.
Higher trust increases the data owner’s confidence and allows
a wider feasible ε-range, enabling more informative counter-
offers when prior cooperation is strong. Conversely, low trust
reduces the maximum permissible ε and may trigger fallback
policies such as reporting limitations or additional verification.
The sensitivity score Sx and trust score Tij jointly govern
negotiation by capturing complementary aspects of a request:
sensitivity characterizes what information is requested, while
trust captures who is requesting it. Sensitivity reflects intrinsic
data risk (e.g., granularity or temporal scope), whereas trust

reflects requester behavior and historical compliance. In peer-
to-peer energy trading, households are generally willing to
share fine-grained load data with trusted neighbors with whom
they have previously traded, while restricting disclosure to
aggregated data for new or infrequent partners. This reflects
common practice in community energy markets, where re-
peated successful interactions increase willingness to share
operational details. Such history may permit a higher privacy
budget ε, but this remains bounded by data sensitivity and
the remaining cumulative budget; even with strong compliance
records, highly sensitive requests remain tightly constrained to
prevent long-term privacy loss. While related to decentralized
reputation systems, the proposed mechanism operates differ-
ently.4 Instead, it employs a continuous reliability score in
[0, 1], derived from historical adherence, output quality, and
successful completions with greater weight on recent behavior.
Higher scores allow more informative disclosure, whereas
lower scores enforce stricter aggregation and noise, supporting
cooperation while preserving long-term privacy guarantees.
The declared purpose of a request plays a central role in
determining how strictly privacy should be enforced. Certain
purposes (e.g., billing) are legally mandated and operationally
essential, whereas others (e.g., behavioural profiling) carry
substantial privacy risks. To formalize this effect, we define
a purpose compatibility score as follows.
Definition 3.4 (Purpose Compatibility): Let p denote the
declared purpose of a data request. The compatibility function,
P(p) ∈[0, 1] quantifies the legitimacy and societal acceptability
of the purpose. Higher P(p) values correspond to purposes that
align with regulatory norms and grid-operational requirements.
In practice, the value of P(p) is determined using a prede-
fined compatibility table derived from regulatory guidelines,
standard energy-market operations, and commonly accepted
industry practices. Purposes that are explicitly required for
settlement, billing, or grid operation are assigned higher
scores, while purposes that are optional, exploratory, or
weakly regulated receive lower values. This mapping is fixed,
auditable, and independent of the requester. Representative
examples used throughout this work include P(billing) =
1.0, P(forecasting)
=
0.8, P(demand response)
=
0.7,
P(peer trading) = 0.6, and P(profiling) = 0.1. Higher com-
patibility values correspond to purposes that justify lower noise
injection or broader access, while low-scoring purposes trig-
ger stronger noise or counter-offers with reduced granularity.
Thus, P(p) acts as a normative filter in the negotiation process,
complementing sensitivity Sx and interaction reliability Tij. In
this work, P(p) is static and assigned via a predefined lookup
table based on the operational necessity of the declared pur-
pose. Core market functions (e.g., billing or settlement) receive
the highest scores; widely used but non-mandatory activities
(e.g., forecasting or grid monitoring) receive slightly lower
scores; and optional or exploratory purposes (e.g., behavioural
profiling) receive low scores due to limited necessity and
higher privacy impact. Each purpose is mapped to a fixed value
4Traditional reputation systems typically make binary allow/deny decisions.
in [0, 1] prior to deployment and applied uniformly across
requests, ensuring transparency, auditability, and resistance
to strategic purpose rephrasing. Representative categories and
scores are shown in Table II.
A. Privacy-Budget Optimization and Decision Logic
The Adaptive Privacy-Budget Negotiation Protocol (APBNP)
seeks to find the optimal privacy parameter, denoted as ε⋆,
by balancing four key factors in responsible data sharing: the
usefulness of the data, the privacy risk based on feature sen-
sitivity and remaining budget, the trust between the requester
and data owner, and the legitimacy of the request’s purpose.
The protocol assesses each potential ε value by evaluating
a combined score that rewards utility, trust, and legitimate
purpose, while penalizing privacy risks and associated long-
term costs. The goal is to maximize this score to achieve the
best compromise between data utility and privacy protection.
The optimal value is the one that maximizes ε is,
ε⋆= arg maxε∈[0,εmax]

λ1U(ε) −λ2R(ε | Sx, Hj) + λ3Tij + λ4P(p) −λ5C(ε)

(3)
APBNP selects the privacy budget ε that maximizes data
utility while limiting privacy risk, accounting for declared
purpose, trust, and cost, with non-negative coefficients λk
weighting their relative influence.5 Solving Eq. (3) yields
one of three outcomes: (i) approval, when ε⋆satisfies all
feasibility constraints; (ii) rejection, when no feasible ε meets
minimum privacy guarantees; or (iii) a counter-offer, in which
adjusted parameters (w, r, x) produce a policy-compliant ε⋆.
In all cases, APBNP verifies that ε⋆does not exceed the
data owner’s remaining cumulative privacy budget, thereby
preventing excessive information leakage.
Definition 3.5 (Feasibility Constraints): A privacy budget ε⋆
is feasible if it satisfies:
ε⋆≥εmin(Sx, p), ε⋆≤Hremaining
j
,
(4)
where εmin is the minimum noise level required to protect
the requested feature set given its sensitivity Sx and declared
purpose p. If both inequalities hold, the contract is approved
and execution proceeds to secure key reconstruction and
differentially private release. Otherwise, APBNP attempts to
generate a counter-offer by adjusting the reporting window,
temporal resolution, or requested feature granularity. If no such
modification yields a feasible ε, the system issues a formal
rejection to maintain strict privacy guarantees.
B. Secure-Computation & TSS Integration
The X–NegoBox negotiation engine operates entirely inside
a dedicated secure computation environment (SCE), ensur-
ing confidentiality, integrity, and correctness of all negotia-
tion artefacts, including contract metadata, feature-sensitivity
scores, trust evidence, purpose compatibility evaluations, and
intermediate computations used to determine the optimal pri-
vacy budget ε⋆. The SCE follows a privacy-by-design architec-
ture combining authenticated encryption, isolated execution,
5The weights λk regulate the trade-off between utility and privacy preser-
vation.

and a threshold secret sharing (TSS) mechanism for key
management. All contract requests are authenticated using
the requester’s public key, and metadata such as load for
(e.g., purpose and features) is protected via authenticated
encryption EncKpub(p, x, r), preventing inspection or tamper-
ing by intermediate nodes.Only the Secure Contract Executor
inside the SCE holds the private keys, and all negotiation and
decision logic executes locally within the prosumer-controlled
TABLE II: Purpose-compatibility scores
P(p) (higher = more operationally es-
sential).
Purpose
Rationale
P (p)
Billing / Settlement
Billing, market settlement, regula-
tory compliance
1.0
Load Forecasting
Short- and medium-term demand
prediction
0.8
Grid Monitoring
Congestion, voltage, and anomaly
detection
0.75
P2P Energy Trading
Optional, user-driven local energy
exchange
0.6
Behavioural Profiling
Habit inference; not operationally
required
0.1
DataBox. This includes
APBNP
optimization,
feasibility checks, pur-
pose compatibility as-
sessment, and expla-
nation generation, all
performed
using
lo-
cal metadata and pre-
defined policy tables,
without any centralized
coordinator, shared global state, or external computation. As a
result, neither raw household data nor intermediate negotiation
artefacts leave the local execution boundary. TSS operates
at a separate authorization layer and is invoked only after
contract approval to authorize the release of differentially
private outputs. The signing key is split across independent
entities (e.g., trusted enclaves or organizationally distinct edge
services), such that in a (k, n) configuration (e.g., (3, 5)), at
least k nodes must cooperatively reconstruct the key. This
separation keeps sensitive decision-making local to the data
owner while distributing execution authorization to prevent
unilateral or premature disclosure, allowing X–NegoBox to
combine local optimization and explainability with distributed
authorization.
Definition 3.6 (Threshold Secret Sharing): A (k, n) TSS
scheme splits a cryptographic secret s into n shares s −→
(s1, s2, . . . , sn), such that any subset of at least k shares
can reconstruct s, while any subset of size < k yields zero
information about s.
Typical deployments use (k, n) = (3, 5) or (4, 7), balancing
resilience to node failure with compromise resistance. In
Threshold Secret Sharing (TSS), a signing key is split into n
shares and distributed across independent nodes such that any
subset of at least k nodes can reconstruct the key, while fewer
than k reveal no information. This prevents any single entity
from authorizing data release without majority agreement. TSS
is activated once a contract is ready for execution. After a
safe privacy budget ε⋆is determined, a reconstruction request
is issued, and the key is recovered only if sufficient trusted
nodes cooperate: {si}i∈K =⇒Reconstruct(s), ∥K| ≥k. The recon-
structed secret s is used exactly once to authorize the privacy-
preserving transformation Dj
DP with ε⋆
−−−−−−→e
Dj,after which the key
is immediately erased from memory. Even an adversary with
temporary control over one or two nodes cannot force data
release or weaken DP noise parameters. Authorization is pos-
sible only if (i) the negotiation protocol determines a safe ε⋆,
and (ii) the threshold of trusted nodes jointly reconstructs the
key. We employ established TSS constructions (e.g., Shamir’s
polynomial-based scheme or modern lattice-based variants)
rather than introducing a new protocol. Designing a next-
generation, negotiation-aware TSS that embeds policy con-
straints directly into the reconstruction process is left for future
work. Figure 2 illustrates the resulting authorization workflow
in X-NegoBox, showing how negotiation and explainabil-
ity remain local within a Trusted Execution Environment,
while execution authorization is distributed across independent
threshold nodes.
Secure Computation Environment (prosumer-controlled)
Input & Auth
Policy & Trust
ε⋆
DP Release
TSS Node 1
Key share s1
TSS Node 2
Key share s2
TSS Node 3
Key share s3
≥k shares required
Requester
encrypted request
Consumer
e
Dj
Fig. 2: Adaptive Privacy-Budget Negotiation Protocol. Negotiation
runs locally in the prosumer-controlled Secure Computation En-
vironment; Threshold Secret Sharing (TSS) authorizes a one-time
differentially private release, preventing unilateral disclosure.
The computational overhead of APBNP is modest and well
suited for deployment at the edge, such as within a household
DataBox or trusted gateway device. The privacy-budget selec-
tion problem is formulated as a one-dimensional optimization
over the interval ε ∈[0, εmax], evaluated in practice over
a finite set of M candidate values, resulting in O(M) time
complexity.6 The remaining components of the negotiation are
lightweight. Sensitivity scoring and application-level compat-
ibility evaluation operate only on request metadata
Algorithm 1 X-Contract Explanation
Require: Decision d, scores (Sx, Tij, P (p), Hrem
j
), opti-
mized ε⋆
1: if d = approve then
2:
return ApprovalExplanation(Sx, Tij, P (p), ε⋆, UPU)
3: else if d = reject then
4:
return RejectionExplanation(Sx, Hrem
j
)
5: else if d = counter then
6:
return CounterOfferExplanation(w, r, ε⋆)
7: end if
and
scale
linearly with
the
number
of
requested
features,
which
is
typically
small.7
Feasibility
checks involve simple comparisons against precomputed
thresholds and the remaining privacy budget, and therefore
execute in constant time. The threshold secret sharing (TSS)
mechanism is invoked only after a contract has been approved
and does not participate in the optimization process itself.
Key reconstruction requires cooperation among k out of
n key-holding entities, incurring O(k) communication and
computation cost, where k ≪n in typical deployments.8
Overall, the latency of APBNP is dominated by local
metadata processing and simple arithmetic operations. As
a result, negotiation time remains predictable, bounded,
6In practice, M is small and fixed by design (e.g., tens of candidate values),
yielding negligible latency.
7These operations are independent of dataset size or historical record length.
8Reconstruction occurs at most once per approved contract, so its overhead
is amortized and does not affect the negotiation phase.

and independent of the volume of raw data stored in the
DataBox, making the framework practical for real-time and
resource-constrained edge environments.
IV. X-CONTRACT: EXPLAINABLE AGREEMENT LAYER
While APBNP determines the optimal privacy budget ε⋆and
feasibility of a contract, prosumers require understandable
justifications to make informed decisions about data shar-
ing. To address this, X-NegoBox incorporates X-Contract,
an explainable agreement layer that generates transparent,
human-readable and machine-interpretable explanations for
every negotiation outcome. X-Contract increases prosumer
trust, improves accountability, and supports regulatory com-
pliance in energy data ecosystems. X-Contract is built on
three principles: Transparency: Prosumers must understand
why a contract is approved, rejected, or counter-offered.
Actionability: Explanations should provide concrete steps
(e.g., reduce time window) that improve the likelihood of
approval. Traceability: Every explanation is logged, ensuring
accountability and enabling auditing of privacy decisions. For
each negotiation outcome produced by APBNP, X-Contract
provides one of three explanation types.
• Approval Explanation: Clarifies why the request satisfies
privacy constraints.
• Rejection Explanation: Identifies which constraints were
violated and why no feasible ε⋆exists.
• Counter-Offer Explanation: Suggests modifications to con-
tract parameters to achieve a valid privacy budget.
These explanations rely on the underlying factors computed by
APBNP: sensitivity, trust, purpose, and historical budget. X-
Contract summarizes the tradeoff between privacy and utility
through the privacy–utility score:
UPU = λ1
 1 −R(ε⋆)

+ λ2U(ε⋆) + λ3Tij −λ4C(ε⋆).
(5)
A higher value indicates that the contract provides strong
utility with acceptable risk. The score is included in the
explanation to inform both parties. X-Contract relies on a
rule engine mapping APBNP outputs to explanations. Let
d ∈{approve, reject, counter} be the decision. The explanation
logic is:
Explain(d) =





Expapp(Tij, Sx, P(p), ε⋆)
d = approve,
Exprej(Sx, Hrem
j
)
d = reject,
Expctr(w, r, ε⋆)
d = counter.
(6)
X-Contract explains why a data-sharing request is approved,
rejected, or modified by translating the outcome of APBNP
into a human-readable rationale. For approved requests, ex-
planations highlight the key factors enabling safe acceptance,
such as acceptable sensitivity, sufficient remaining privacy
budget, and appropriate declared use. For rejected requests,
the explanation explicitly identifies the violated constraint
(e.g., excessive sensitivity or insufficient remaining budget).
When a counteroffer is issued, X-Contract clarifies which
parameters were adjusted, such as reduced temporal resolution
or increased noise, and why the modified request becomes
acceptable. Each explanation is generated from template-
based functions referencing computed scores, thresholds, the
privacy–utility score Uu, and actionable guidance for revising
future requests. We illustrate this with a peer-to-peer energy
trading scenario in which Prosumer A requests 5-minute
flexibility data from Prosumer B for one day. With sufficient
remaining budget (Hj = 5.0), the request is approved as low-
sensitivity and allocated ε⋆= 2.25. With lower but feasible
budget (Hj = 1.5), the request is approved with ε⋆= 1.50
and an explicit warning that most remaining privacy capacity
is consumed. When the budget is insufficient (Hj = 0.3),
the request is rejected to prevent privacy risk, and the re-
quester is guided to revise the request by reducing resolution,
duration, or feature sensitivity. These cases show that X-
Contract delivers consistent, auditable explanations aligned
with the underlying negotiation logic. X-Contract provides
transparent and interpretable decision reasoning that is largely
absent from existing privacy-preserving systems. By exposing
actionable feedback and scoring factors, it enables prosumers
to understand negotiation outcomes. Algorithm 1 summarizes
the explanation-generation process for approval, rejection, and
counter-offer decisions. Robustness is evaluated by perturbing
interaction-reliability and sensitivity scores by ±5%. Across
2000 replayed requests, explanation outcomes remain un-
changed in 97.25% of cases, with deviations occurring only at
feasibility threshold crossings. This indicates that explanations
are locally stable and aligned with the underlying negotiation
logic rather than numerical noise.
V. LOCAL EXECUTION SANDBOX
After a contract is approved or adjusted via APBNP and X-
Contract, the requester submits computation code for execu-
tion within the prosumer’s Private DataBox. Since raw data
never leaves prosumer control, the execution sandbox enforces
contract compliance, differential-privacy guarantees, and safe
execution of untrusted code. Prior to execution, the DataBox
validates that the code accesses only the approved feature set
x, time window w, and granularity r; uses only whitelisted
operations (e.g., arithmetic, aggregation, inference); passes
lightweight static analysis for prohibited file or network access,
recursion, or exfiltration logic; and executes under a bounded
runtime to prevent denial-of-service attacks. Validation failures
are explained via X-Contract. Validated code executes in an
isolated sandbox (e.g., containerized VM, lightweight enclave,
or WebAssembly runtime) with no access to system files,
external processes, or network interfaces. Memory safety is en-
forced by bounding heap and stack usage, and execution trac-
ing is used to detect suspicious behavior. After computing the
output y, the DataBox applies differential privacy noise based
on the negotiated budget ε⋆, producing ˜y = y+Noise(ε⋆, Sx),
where noise magnitude increases with sensitivity Sx and
decreases with higher trust or purpose compatibility. Supported
mechanisms include Laplace noise for numerical aggregates,
Gaussian noise for model outputs, and randomized rounding
for categorical values; privacy loss and noise application are
logged by X-Contract. Finally, the DataBox enforces con-
tract compliance by restricting output dimensionality, capping
resolution, and rejecting outputs that expose raw values or
exceed the DP budget. Violations halt execution and are
logged. Through validation, isolation, and DP enforcement,

the sandbox mitigates repeated-query, model-inversion, side-
channel, and code-injection attacks, operationalizing the run
code, not data paradigm while ensuring privacy, integrity, and
explainability throughout the data-access lifecycle.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section we evaluate the X-NegoBox framework and the
APBNP negotiation engine. All experiments are implemented
in Python and executed on a local workstation. Performance
is assessed along three axes: (i) a 48-scenario cross-dataset
benchmark using real load time series, proxy-real traces de-
rived from real data, and synthetic loads; (ii) a full-scale
synthetic smart-grid simulation with 100 heterogeneous pro-
sumers; and (iii) a privacy-budget sweep varying the initial
privacy budget. These experiments evaluate privacy preserva-
tion, negotiation stability, acceptance behavior, and sensitivity
to budget availability. All experiments reuse identical request
streams and real datasets to ensure controlled and comparable
evaluation, without relying on synthetic fallback data.
Datasets: For the analysis, we utilize two dataset families:
real/proxy-real datasets like the UCI Household Dataset and
national-level load data from DE, FR, IT (Energy-Charts
API), along with synthetic city-level datasets generated for
Oslo, Berlin, Rome, and Paris. We also create a synthetic
prosumer ecosystem with 100 prosumers and 60 days of
hourly data. This ecosystem features varied load profiles influ-
enced by factors such as temperature-dependent heating and
appliance usage, enabling the exploration of appliance-level
sensitivities, trust distribution, and privacy-budget dynamics
across multiple interactions. We simulate a trust-inflation ad-
versary that behaves cooperatively to increase its trust score
over time. Despite trust saturating at its maximum value,
cumulative privacy leakage remains bounded by the remaining
budget. In the experiment, the adversary obtains 49 accepted
contracts, after which the remaining budget drops below 0.05.
This confirms that trust alone cannot override cumulative
budget and sensitivity constraints in APBNP.
Assumptions and Execution Environment: Our evaluation
assumes: (i) a secure local execution environment with en-
crypted storage and authenticated communication; (ii) trusted
DataBox modules maintaining Hmax
j
, history, and local DP
mechanisms; (iii) confidentiality of contract metadata, privacy
budgets, and TSS keys; and (iv) local DP noise injection before
any data leaves the DataBox. X-NegoBox targets resource-
constrained edge environments (e.g., smart meters), where
APBNP achieves linear-time complexity with millisecond la-
tency, and communication is minimized via “run code, not
data.” The system assumes a semi-trusted decentralized setting
with SCE enforcement, TSS authorization (< k of n com-
promised), and trust-aware but constrained negotiation. While
realistic, deployment may require lightweight cryptography,
batching, and hardware enclaves, and assumptions should be
revisited under adversarial or large-scale conditions. Under this
setting, APBNP enables adaptive negotiation of ε⋆based on
trust, sensitivity, purpose, and cost while preserving privacy
constraints.
Negotiation Model and Privacy Mechanisms: Each pro-
sumer j maintains an individual privacy budget Hj, repre-
senting the remaining allowable privacy loss. In the synthetic
ecosystem, budgets are initialized as H(0)
j
= 8.0, ∀j ∈
{1, . . . , 100}, and are decremented as contracts are accepted.
Given a request defined by a purpose p (e.g., forecasting,
billing), a feature set F (e.g., hourly load, PV generation,
EV events), a requester trust score T ∈[0, 1], and a feature
sensitivity score S ≥0, the APBNP engine searches for a
feasible privacy parameter ε⋆by maximizing the following
scoring function:
Score(ε) = 2√ε −1.8 · Sε1.7 + 1.0T + 0.8P −0.15ε.
(7)
Here, S =
X
f∈F
sensitivity(f) and P = purpose-score(p). The term
2√ε
models
utility
gains
from
reduced
noise,
while
−1.8 S ε1.7 penalizes privacy risk for sensitive features. A
regularizer −0.15 ε discourages excessive budgets, and T
and P encode trust and purpose awareness. The optimizer
searches for ε⋆over 0 < ε ≤εmax, subject to ε⋆≤Hj,
ensuring that allocated privacy loss does not exceed the
remaining budget. If no feasible ε⋆exists under the ini-
tial sensitivity S, X-NegoBox applies a three-stage fallback.
TABLE III: Mean acceptance
rates across datasets and negoti-
ation patterns.
Dataset
Calibrated
Fixed
Natural
Berlin
0.599
0.597
0.593
DE
0.604
0.609
0.593
FR
0.608
0.595
0.589
IT
0.595
0.603
0.598
Oslo
0.613
0.599
0.585
Paris
0.588
0.609
0.605
Rome
0.594
0.603
0.604
UCI
0.592
0.590
0.599
Mean
0.599
0.601
0.596
First, it issues a counter-
offer by reducing sensitiv-
ity to 0.25S (via downsam-
pling, aggregation, or feature
removal) and re-optimizes. If
unsuccessful, it may allow a
minimal ε only for highly
trusted requesters in low-risk
scenarios. If both strategies
fail, or if the safety condition Hj < 4S holds, the request
is rejected to prioritize privacy protection. Upon approval,
the allocated ε⋆is deducted from Hj, enforcing cumulative
privacy-risk accounting for future negotiations.
Baseline Comparison: We compare APBNP against a fixed-
ϵ differential privacy baseline using identical request streams
on the same real datasets. Evaluation focuses on acceptance
rate, cumulative privacy leakage, and budget exhaustion time.
Across all datasets, APBNP achieves a mean acceptance rate
of 0.9998 while keeping cumulative privacy leakage within
the initial budget (H(0)
= 8.0) and avoiding premature
exhaustion. In contrast, the fixed-ϵ baseline collapses: for
ϵfix = 0.10, acceptance drops to 0.04, and the budget is
exhausted after only 80 requests. These results show that static
privacy policies cannot sustain continuous operation under
realistic workloads, whereas APBNP supports long-term data
sharing through adaptive budget shaping rather than rejection.
A. Experimental Design
We measure the runtime overhead of APBNP negotiation
and X-CONTRACT explanation generation on a commodity
CPU. Privacy-budget optimization takes 0.32 ms per request,
while explanation generation adds 0.006 ms. Sandboxed exe-
cution incurs a 121% relative overhead, but absolute execution
time remains below 0.02 ms, indicating that X-NEGOBOX
is suitable for real-time edge deployment. Robustness to

parameter mis-specification is assessed by perturbing scoring
weights, trust distributions, and feature-sensitivity coefficients
by ±10%. We conduct three complementary experiments:
• Experiment 1: Cross-Dataset Benchmark (48 scenarios).
We simulate 2000 requester–owner interactions across eight
datasets. Each interaction specifies a request purpose, feature
sensitivities, and a dataset-specific trust score. Three negotia-
tion patterns (fixed-acceptance, natural, dataset-calibrated) are
evaluated under two risk modes (mild, moderate), yielding 48
scenarios to assess acceptance stability and policy robustness.
• Experiment 2: Full Synthetic Smart-Grid Simulation.
Using the corrected APBNP engine, we model a synthetic
ecosystem of 100 prosumers and simulate 2500 interactions.
Requests follow realistic purpose and sensitivity profiles (utili-
ties, aggregators, third-party services). We analyze large-scale
privacy-budget evolution, rejection versus fallback behavior,
and feasibility of the ε⋆scoring function under heterogeneous
trust and sensitivity conditions.
• Experiment 3: Privacy-Budget Sweep. For each initial pri-
vacy budget ε0 ∈{1, . . . , 10}, we simulate 700 interactions
using fixed trust, purpose, and sensitivity distributions. Ac-
ceptance, rejection, and counter-offer rates are measured to
characterize the transition from scarce-privacy (tight budgets)
to surplus-privacy (high feasibility) regimes.
Across all variants, acceptance rates vary within a narrow band
of width 0.001, indicating stable negotiation behavior and low
sensitivity to moderate hyperparameter variation.
B. Results and Discussion
Cross-Dataset Acceptance Behavior: Across all 48 cross-
dataset experiments, we observe that the acceptance rate
lies in a narrow, highly stable band: 0.57 ≤Acceptance ≤0.62.
Table III visualizes this as a heatmap over datasets (rows)
and negotiation patterns/risk modes (columns). It also high-
lights structural differences between household and national
load series, demonstrating the heterogeneity under which X-
NegoBox is evaluated. The global mean and standard deviation
across all scenarios are: ¯A = 0.603, σ = 0.013. Table III
reports the mean acceptance rates aggregated per dataset. Two
observations stand out:
1) Lack of dataset-induced collapse or inflation. Despite differ-
ences in scale (household vs national), climate, and synthetic
generation, all acceptance rates concentrate around ≈0.60.
This indicates that the APBNP scoring function and constraints
are robust to distributional changes in load time series.
2) Balanced negotiation behavior. Acceptance around 0.60 re-
flects a regime where requests are neither trivially accepted
nor systematically rejected. X-NegoBox thus avoids “all-
or-nothing” behavior, which is a known issue in simpler
differential-privacy contracts.
In practical terms, this means that operators can deploy X-
NegoBox across different regions and datasets without having
to retune the entire negotiation logic for each scenario.
Full Synthetic Prosumers (100-Household Simulation:) In
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Initial Privacy Budget ϵ0
Decision Rate
Acceptance
Rejection
Counter-offer
Fig. 3: APBNP decision rates as a function of the initial privacy
budget ϵ0. Acceptance rises monotonically, rejection decreases, and
counter-offers vanish beyond ϵ0 ≥4.
the 100-prosumer synthetic experiment involving 2500 inter-
actions, the system achieved an acceptance rate of 87.49%,
with rejection at 12.51% and zero counter-offers. The mean
remaining privacy budget per prosumer was 0.765, indicating
that the negotiation engine effectively produces feasible ε⋆
0
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
0.58
0.6
0.62
0.64
0.66
0.68
0.7
Experiment Index
Acceptance Rate
Acceptance Rate Across 48 Experiments.
Observed acceptance
Target Min 60%
Target Max 70%
Fig. 4: Acceptance rate across configurations, show-
ing stable APBNP negotiation behavior.
values
without
becoming
stuck
in
infeasible
scenarios.
The
negligible
counter-
offer
rate
suggests
that
most
beneficial requests can be accepted directly, while the
conservative budget usage reflects that prosumers do not fully
deplete their privacy budgets, demonstrating the system’s
efficiency in resource consumption. From a deployment
perspective, these
findings suggest that X-NegoBox
can sustain long-term operation without rapidly exhausting
prosumers’ privacy budgets, while still enabling a high
fraction of socially useful contracts. As shown in Fig. 4,
acceptance rates remain tightly concentrated around 60%,
confirming stable negotiation behavior across patterns and
datasets. Fig. 5 provides a structured view of how acceptance
behaves jointly across datasets and policy patterns, reinforcing
the observation of dataset-independent stability. The transition
observed in Fig. 5 empirically validates the theoretically
predicted privacy-regime behavior: relaxations in ϵ0 enlarge
the feasible negotiation region.
Privacy-Budget Sweep: Figure 3 shows acceptance, rejection,
and counter-offer rates as functions of the initial privacy bud-
get ε0 ∈{1, . . . , 10}, revealing four operating regimes. In the
scarce-privacy regime (ε0 ≤2), acceptance ranges from 55%
to 74%, with frequent rejections required to preserve privacy.
The transitional regime (2 < ε0 < 4) exhibits a smooth
increase in acceptance as additional budget becomes available.
In the stable regime (4 ≤ε0 ≤7), acceptance saturates
around 99% with negligible rejection. Finally, the surplus
regime (ε0 ≥8) corresponds to a setting in which privacy
is no longer a binding constraint: acceptance reaches 1.00 and
remains constant, indicating that further budget increases do
not affect negotiation outcomes. This behavior reflects dimin-

Oslo
IT
Berlin
Rome
Paris
UCI
DE
FR
0.98
0.99
1
±0
0.98
0.98
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Acceptance Rate
Mean Acceptance Rate Across Datasets
0
2
4
5
6
8
10
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Scarcity-Driven Rejection
Near-Perfect Acceptance
Initial Privacy Budget ϵ0
Acceptance Rate
Acceptance vs. Initial Privacy Budget
Fig. 5: Acceptance stability and privacy-regime transitions in X-NEGOBOX. (Left) Mean acceptance remains within a narrow band (±0.02)
across datasets. (Right) Increasing initial privacy budgets transitions APBNP from scarcity-driven rejection to near-perfect acceptance.
ishing returns in privacy-budget allocation. At low ε0, privacy
dominates feasibility, and small budget increases substantially
improve acceptance. Beyond moderate budgets (approximately
ε0 ∈[4, 5]), this constraint weakens and other factors, such as
data sensitivity, declared purpose, and remaining cumulative
budget, become decisive. From a system-design perspective,
these results indicate that excessively large initial privacy
budgets are unnecessary: comparable acceptance performance
can be achieved with moderate privacy flexibility, preserving
long-term privacy without sacrificing negotiation success.
Discussion, Limitations, and Future Work: Results show
that X-NegoBox effectively balances utility and privacy,
achieving stable acceptance without tuning and high accep-
tance (87.49%) with minimal counter-offs. It manages budgets
conservatively and adapts to trust and sensitivity variations.
Limitations include simulation-based evaluation, static purpose
scores P(p), lack of network-level TSS validation, and ab-
sence of user studies. Future work will explore real-world
deployment, adaptive purpose modeling, negotiation-aware
cryptography, and user-centric evaluation. 9
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents X-NegoBox, an explainable and adap-
tive privacy-budget negotiation framework for secure peer-
to-peer energy data exchange. By combining local execution
with APBNP and X-Contract, it replaces static policies with
context-aware negotiation. Experiments across diverse datasets
show stable acceptance, sustained data sharing, and improved
transparency, supporting privacy-aware decentralized energy
systems. Future work includes negotiation-aware TSS, incen-
tive design, and large-scale deployment.