Position Paper: Denial-of-Service against
Multi-Round Transaction Simulation
Yuzhe Tang∗, Yibo Wang†, Wanning Ding∗, Jiaqi Chen∗, Taesoo Kim‡
∗Syracuse University, {ytang100, wding04, jchen217}@syr.edu
†University of Wyoming, ywang34@uwyo.edu
‡Georgia Institute of Technology and Microsoft, taesoo@gatech.edu
Abstract—Transaction simulation is an important subsystem
of block building, denial of whose service could lead to severe
damage to the blockchain ecosystem and transaction delivery.
Denial of block building has been studied, where the existing
attack designs either target single-round builders, such as Con-
ditionalExhaust [1], or target two-round builders, by exploiting
cross-round inconsistency, such as GhostTX [1] and denial of
sequencers [2].
This work examines the denial-of-service security of multi-
round
transaction
simulation
under
a
new
exploit:
inter-
transaction dependency that manifests in smart-contract state.
On public blockchains, block building is the process of
assembling candidate blocks from unconfirmed transactions,
from which downstream validators select the next block to ap-
pend to the chain. In practice, block building can handle either
public or private transactions, operate on-chain or off-chain,
and run as a module within validator nodes or as standalone
nodes. Internally, a block-building service’s core responsibility
is to select unconfirmed transactions from mempools, order
and execute them before package into the block to be built.
Builder DoS security: Block builders control transaction
admission in blockchain systems, so denial of their service
can significantly disrupt the ecosystem. The failure of a
builder’s service excludes its customers’ transactions from
the blockchain, hurts the fairness of the upstream MEV-
searcher market, centralizes the builder market, and forces
downstream relays and proposers to skip victim builders’
blocks. In practice, such systematic unfairness can benefit
competing builders and MEV searchers and incentivize them
to mount the attacks.
Next, we review existing attacks and outline the latest multi-
round builder design before introducing our research problem.
• Existing attacks: Denial-of-service attack against block
building process has been examined in prior work through
several attack vectors, such as disrupting builders’ internal
mempools [3], [4], [1] or exhausting computing resources by
transaction flooding [5], [6], [7] or by executing resource-
intensive smart contracts. The last vector can succeed by
evading the protective gas mechanism enforced during block
validation [8], [9], [10] or by exploiting the speculative
contract execution prior to validation [1], [5].
Among these vectors, speculative contract execution is a
promising attack vector. The existing attacks, including Con-
ditionalExhaust [1], GhostTX [1], denial of sequencers [2],
and DoERS [5], exploit factors such as builders’ cen-
sorship compliance, or RPC contract-testing APIs (e.g.,
eth_call), or the inconsistency between the checks inside
block building and outside (e.g., the downstream relays in
PBS [1] or the upstream pre-mempool validation [2]).
• Multi-round builders: A multi-round builder runs uncon-
firmed transactions across multiple rounds, each under a
distinct transaction ordering. For bundling services, multi-
round designs help search for bundles that maximize pro-
poser revenue. The extra rounds also allow filtering out
transactions that revert.
Attack designs: The existing attacks surveyed above are
largely agnostic to the internal design of block building and are
ineffective against multi-round builders. In brief, their common
attack strategy is to passively inspect whether the current
execution is speculative and to release the resource-exhaustion
payload accordingly. For example, ConditionalExhaust [1]
checks whether the underlying node is censorship-compliant
and triggers resource exhaustion only on such nodes. These
passive checks, however, cannot distinguish which block-
building round a transaction is executing in. Consequently,
the resource-exhaustion payloads are triggered prematurely
during pre-rounds, where any induced slowdown is confined
to adversarial threads and does not interfere with normal
transactions executing in parallel threads.
Observing the limitation, we propose a proactive design
for evasive attacks on multi-round builders. The key idea
is by exploiting inter-transaction dependencies: On an n-
round builder, our adversarial contract conceals the resource-
exhaustive payload in a path guarded by (n −1) branch
conditions, each depending on a distinct state variable. An
attack issues more than n transactions, where the first (n −1)
set up the context and the remaining transactions continuously
trigger the payload. As a result, adversarial transactions behave
normally in all pre-rounds, evading invalidation, and deliver
the payload only in the final round, where adversarial and nor-
mal transactions execute together in serial order and delaying
one transaction directly delays those that follow.
Our attack design uses a sequence of transactions that access
shared smart contract state. We stress that this exploitation of
inter-transaction dependencies has not been considered in prior
DoS attack designs. In particular, the most relevant attacks,
such as ConditionalExhaust and GhostTX [1], use sequences
of independent transactions without shared state. The only
arXiv:2604.21169v2 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

attack based on the design of inter-dependent transactions is
latent overdraft (e.g., DETER-Z in [3]), which is used against
mempool, not transaction execution as in this work.
Mitigation: We explore the design space of defenses, propose
several mitigation strategies, and identify a fundamental chal-
lenge in securing any finite-round builder against DoS attacks.
Summary: This work addresses an open research problem:
denial of service against multi-round transaction simulation
without relying on cross-round inconsistency. It presents a new
attack vector that exploits inter-transaction dependency across
rounds in block building.