Strategic Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Architecture for
Cost-Effective Code Vulnerability Detection
Zhaohui Geoffrey Wang
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA, USA
zwang000@usc.edu
ABSTRACT
Automated code vulnerability detection is critical for software se-
curity, yet existing approaches face a fundamental trade-off be-
tween detection accuracy and computational cost. We propose a
heterogeneous multi-agent architecture inspired by game-theoretic
principles, combining cloud-based LLM experts with a local light-
weight verifier. Our “3+1” architecture deploys three cloud-based
expert agents (DeepSeek-V3) that analyze code from complemen-
tary perspectives—code structure, security patterns, and debugging
logic—in parallel, while a local verifier (Qwen3-8B) performs ad-
versarial validation at zero marginal cost. We formalize this de-
sign through a two-layer game framework: (1) a cooperative game
among experts capturing super-additive value from diverse per-
spectives, and (2) an adversarial verification game modeling qual-
ity assurance incentives. Experiments on 262 real samples from
the NIST Juliet Test Suite across 14 CWE types, with balanced
vulnerable and benign classes, demonstrate that our approach
achieves 77.2% F1 score with 62.9% precision and 100% recall at
$0.002 per sample—outperforming both a single-expert LLM base-
line (F1 71.4%) and Cppcheck static analysis (MCC 0). The adversar-
ial verifier significantly improves precision (+10.3 percentage points,
𝑝< 10−6, McNemar’s test) by filtering false positives, while parallel
execution achieves a 3.0× speedup. Our work demonstrates that
game-theoretic design principles can guide effective heterogeneous
multi-agent architectures for cost-sensitive software engineering
tasks.
KEYWORDS
Multi-Agent Systems; Game Theory; Large Language Models; Vul-
nerability Detection; Strategic Cooperation
ACM Reference Format:
Zhaohui Geoffrey Wang. 2026. Strategic Heterogeneous Multi-Agent Ar-
chitecture for Cost-Effective Code Vulnerability Detection. In Proc. of the
25th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2026), Paphos, Cyprus, May 25 – 29, 2026, IFAAMAS, 11 pages.
1
INTRODUCTION
Code vulnerability detection is a critical challenge in software
security, with the global cost of cybercrime projected to reach
$10.5 trillion annually [13]. Traditional static analysis tools like
Cppcheck [2] offer fast, low-cost analysis but suffer from limited se-
mantic understanding, while single-agent LLM approaches achieve
Proc. of the 25th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2026), C. Amato, L. Dennis, V. Mascardi, J. Thangarajah (eds.), May 25 – 29,
2026, Paphos, Cyprus. © 2026 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). This work is licenced under the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC-BY 4.0) licence.
higher accuracy at prohibitive cost. Recent multi-agent LLM sys-
tems [18, 21, 23] have shown promising results, but typically em-
ploy homogeneous agent pools—all agents use the same expensive
cloud model—missing opportunities for cost optimization through
heterogeneous design.
This paper addresses a fundamental question: How should we allo-
cate heterogeneous computational resources across multiple agents to
achieve optimal trade-offs between detection quality and operational
cost? The key insight is that vulnerability detection benefits from
two distinct capabilities: (1) deep semantic analysis requiring pow-
erful models, and (2) consistency checking that can be performed
by lighter models. This asymmetry motivates a heterogeneous ar-
chitecture.
We propose a “3+1” heterogeneous multi-agent architecture
combining:
• Three cloud-based LLM experts (DeepSeek-V3 [3]) analyz-
ing code from complementary perspectives: code structure
analysis, security pattern matching, and debugging/edge-
case reasoning. These agents execute in parallel, with diverse
viewpoints providing complementary coverage that exceeds
any single perspective.
• One local verifier (Qwen3-8B [17]) performing adversarial
validation at zero marginal API cost. Running on a local
GPU, this agent receives all expert reports and checks for
consistency, hallucinated claims, and missed vulnerabilities.
We formalize the architectural design through a two-layer game
framework:
(1) Layer 1 (Cooperative Game): The three experts form a
coalition with super-additive value—their combined detec-
tion covers vulnerability patterns that individual experts
miss, formalizing why diverse perspectives outperform iden-
tical agents.
(2) Layer 2 (Adversarial Game): The verifier acts as an inde-
pendent adversary that improves system precision by catch-
ing false positives and hallucinations in expert outputs.
Critically, we show that the game-theoretic framework yields
testable predictions validated empirically: (1) diverse expert coali-
tions exhibit super-additive value when combined with verification,
outperforming a single-expert baseline (Proposition 1), (2) inde-
pendent verification significantly improves precision (𝑝< 10−6,
Theorem 1), and (3) the heterogeneous cloud-local split achieves
favorable cost-quality trade-offs analyzable through mechanism
design. While our LLM agents do not engage in explicit strategic
reasoning, the game-theoretic framework correctly predicts system-
level behavior—validating its utility as an analytical and design tool
for multi-agent LLM architectures.
We make the following contributions:
arXiv:2604.21282v1 [cs.CR] 23 Apr 2026

(1) A game-theory-inspired framework for heterogeneous
multi-agent vulnerability detection, formalizing cooperative
expert analysis and adversarial verification as a principled
design methodology (Section 3).
(2) Rigorous empirical evaluation on 262 real samples from
the NIST Juliet Test Suite covering 14 CWE types with bal-
anced vulnerable and benign classes, reporting standard
metrics (Precision, Recall, F1, FPR, MCC) with bootstrap
95% confidence intervals and McNemar’s significance test
(Section 5).
(3) Practical cost-quality analysis demonstrating that hetero-
geneous cloud-local architectures achieve favorable Pareto
trade-offs, with the local verifier adding precision improve-
ment at negligible cost (Section 5).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews related work. Section 3 presents our framework and ar-
chitecture. Section 4 describes the experimental setup. Section 5
presents results and analysis. Section 6 concludes with limitations
and future directions.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Static Analysis for Vulnerability Detection
Traditional static analysis tools employ rule-based pattern match-
ing and data-flow analysis to detect vulnerabilities. Cppcheck [2]
uses syntactic pattern matching for C/C++, while commercial tools
like Coverity [20] combine multiple techniques for enterprise de-
ployment. However, these tools face inherent limitations: high false
positive rates due to lack of semantic understanding, and difficulty
detecting complex vulnerabilities that span multiple code paths [9].
Their precision-recall trade-off is fundamentally constrained by the
expressiveness of static rules.
2.2
LLM-Based Vulnerability Detection
Recent work has applied LLMs to vulnerability detection with in-
creasing sophistication. Single-agent approaches using GPT-4 [16]
or specialized code models achieve strong detection rates but at sig-
nificant computational cost. The PrimeVul benchmark [4] revealed
a critical evaluation gap: state-of-the-art models achieve only ∼3–
35% F1 on carefully deduplicated real-world datasets, compared to
∼68% F1 on older benchmarks like Big-Vul that contain significant
data leakage. This highlights the importance of rigorous evaluation
methodology with balanced classes and proper metrics.
Multi-agent approaches have emerged as a promising direction
for vulnerability detection. VulTrial [21] proposes a mock-court
framework where specialized agents (security researcher, code au-
thor, moderator) debate vulnerabilities through structured argumen-
tation, achieving 102% improvement over single-agent baselines
at ICSE 2026. MulVul [23] combines RAG-augmented multi-agent
analysis with cross-model prompt evolution, achieving the current
state-of-the-art 34.79% Macro-F1 on PrimeVul. MultiVer [18] uses a
zero-shot 4-agent ensemble with union voting, reaching 82.7% re-
call on PyVul. LLMxCPG [10] integrates LLMs with Code Property
Graphs for structurally-enhanced analysis.
Our work differs from these approaches by explicitly optimiz-
ing for cost-quality trade-offs through heterogeneous agent design.
While VulTrial and MulVul use homogeneous model pools (all
agents share the same expensive API), we combine paid cloud ex-
perts with a free local verifier, making cost a first-class design
objective.
2.3
Multi-Agent Debate and Collaboration
A growing body of work demonstrates that multi-agent debate im-
proves LLM output quality. Du et al. [5] show that having multiple
LLMs debate improves factuality and reasoning, with agents cor-
recting each other’s errors through iterative rounds—a mechanism
that directly inspires our adversarial verification loop. Liang et
al. [12] extend this to divergent thinking, finding that multi-agent
debate elicits more diverse reasoning paths. CAMEL [11] introduces
role-playing communication protocols for multi-agent collabora-
tion, demonstrating that specialized agent roles outperform generic
prompting. These works establish that iterative multi-agent inter-
action improves output quality, but none apply this mechanism to
the specific cost-quality trade-offs of vulnerability detection with
heterogeneous models.
In software engineering, MetaGPT [8] uses structured multi-
agent workflows for collaborative development, and AutoGen [22]
provides general-purpose agent coordination. However, these frame-
works do not explicitly model the economic trade-offs of heteroge-
neous model allocation.
2.4
Game Theory and LLM Multi-Agent Systems
Game-theoretic analysis of LLM-based multi-agent systems is an
emerging area. A comprehensive survey [7] formalizes LLM in-
teractions as Nash and Stackelberg games, defining “LLM-based
equilibria” where strategies co-evolve through dialogue. The ECON
framework [24] models multi-LLM coordination as an incomplete-
information game seeking Bayesian Nash Equilibrium, where each
LLM responds based on beliefs about co-agents. GTBench [6] bench-
marks LLM strategic reasoning, finding that LLMs deviate from ra-
tional strategies as game complexity increases—motivating our use
of game theory as a design framework rather than assuming strate-
gic behavior by LLM agents. GT-HarmBench [1] extends game-
theoretic evaluation to multi-agent safety, benchmarking risks in
adversarial settings—complementary to our adversarial verification
game.
2.5
Positioning of Our Work
Our architecture shares the multi-perspective analysis approach
with VulTrial and MultiVer, and draws on multi-agent debate [5, 12]
for iterative quality improvement. We uniquely combine: (1) hetero-
geneous resource allocation—paid cloud APIs with free local models;
(2) game-theoretic design rationale—cooperative and adversarial
game formulations justifying architectural choices; and (3) rigorous
evaluation—balanced classes, standard metrics, and statistical sig-
nificance testing. The closest concurrent work, MulVul, achieves
state-of-the-art detection on PrimeVul but does not address cost
optimization. Our contribution is complementary: showing how to
architect cost-effective multi-agent systems with game-theoretic
principles.

3
METHODOLOGY
We present a game-theoretic framework for heterogeneous multi-
agent vulnerability detection. Unlike prior multi-agent approaches
that treat agent coordination as an engineering problem, we for-
malize the design space through cooperative and adversarial game
theory, derive analytical properties, and validate these predictions
empirically.
3.1
Problem Formulation
Given a code snippet 𝑥, vulnerability detection seeks to determine
whether 𝑥contains security vulnerabilities and identify their CWE
types. We formulate this as a multi-agent mechanism design prob-
lem: how to allocate heterogeneous computational resources across
agents to maximize detection quality 𝑄while minimizing cost 𝐶.
Definition 1 (Multi-Agent Vulnerability Detection Game).
A multi-agent detection system is a tuple M = ⟨A, S,𝐶,𝑄, 𝜋⟩where:
• A = {𝑎1, . . . ,𝑎𝑛} is the set of heterogeneous agents
• S = {𝑠1, . . . ,𝑠𝑛} is the strategy space (analysis perspective,
model choice, effort level)
• 𝐶: S𝑛→R+ is the cost function (API charges + compute)
• 𝑄: S𝑛→[0, 1] is the quality function (detection F1)
• 𝜋: A × S𝑛→R is the payoff function, 𝜋𝑖= 𝑤1𝑄−𝑤2𝐶𝑖
The mechanism designer’s problem is to select agent types, roles,
and interaction protocols that induce a desirable equilibrium—high
𝑄at low 𝐶. This connects our work to the mechanism design litera-
ture [14]: we design the “rules of the game” so that the system-level
outcome is Pareto-optimal.
3.2
Two-Layer Game Structure
We decompose the detection problem into two interconnected
games.
3.2.1
Layer 1: Expert Cooperative Game. The first layer models
cooperation among 𝑘expert agents with complementary analysis
perspectives as a coalitional game.
Definition 2 (Expert Coalition Game). An expert coalition
game is 𝐺1 = ⟨𝑁, 𝑣⟩where:
• 𝑁= {1, 2, . . . ,𝑘} is the set of expert agents
• 𝑣: 2𝑁→R is the characteristic function
The coalition value captures the net utility of subset 𝑆⊆𝑁:
𝑣(𝑆) = 𝑤1 · 𝑄(𝑆) −𝑤2 · 𝐶(𝑆)
(1)
where 𝑄(𝑆) is the detection quality (F1) achievable by coalition 𝑆,
and 𝐶(𝑆) is its total cost.
Proposition 1 (Super-Additivity of Diverse Coalitions).
Let 𝑆,𝑇⊆𝑁be disjoint coalitions with complementary analysis
perspectives (i.e., each agent covers vulnerability patterns not covered
by others). If agents in 𝑆detect vulnerability set 𝑉𝑆and agents in 𝑇
detect 𝑉𝑇, then:
𝑄(𝑆∪𝑇) ≥max(𝑄(𝑆),𝑄(𝑇))
(2)
with strict inequality when 𝑉𝑆⊈𝑉𝑇and 𝑉𝑇⊈𝑉𝑆. Furthermore,
if 𝐶(𝑆∪𝑇) = 𝐶(𝑆) + 𝐶(𝑇) (independent cost), then 𝑣(𝑆∪𝑇) ≥
𝑣(𝑆)+𝑣(𝑇) when the quality improvement outweighs the cost increase.
This motivates our choice of three diverse expert roles: a code
structure analyst, a CWE-taxonomy security expert, and a de-
bugging specialist. Their coalition should outperform any single
expert—a prediction we validate in Section 5.
Shapley Value Analysis. The Shapley value 𝜙𝑖quantifies each
expert’s marginal contribution to the coalition:
𝜙𝑖(𝑣) =
∑︁
𝑆⊆𝑁\{𝑖}
|𝑆|!(𝑘−|𝑆| −1)!
𝑘!
[𝑣(𝑆∪{𝑖}) −𝑣(𝑆)]
(3)
For our 3-expert system, the Shapley value determines how much
each perspective (code structure, security, debugging) contributes
to overall detection quality. If 𝜙𝑖> 𝐶𝑖for all 𝑖, every expert “pays
for itself”—the marginal quality improvement exceeds the marginal
cost. We report empirical Shapley values in the appendix.
3.2.2
Layer 2: Adversarial Verification Game. The second layer
models the strategic interaction between the expert coalition and
an independent verifier as an extensive-form game.
Definition 3 (Verification Game). A verification game is 𝐺2 =
⟨𝑃,𝑆𝐸,𝑆𝑉, 𝜋𝐸, 𝜋𝑉⟩where:
• 𝑃= {𝐸,𝑉} are players (Expert coalition, Verifier)
• 𝑆𝐸= {ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ,𝑙𝑜𝑤} represents expert output quality (effort level)
• 𝑆𝑉= {𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡,𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔𝑒,𝑟𝑒𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡} is verifier strategy
• 𝜋𝐸, 𝜋𝑉are payoff functions
The expert coalition’s payoff captures the trade-off between
effort cost and rejection penalty:
𝜋𝐸(𝑠𝐸,𝑠𝑉) = 𝑄(𝑠𝐸) −𝑐(𝑠𝐸) −𝑝· ⊮[𝑠𝑉=𝑟𝑒𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡]
(4)
where 𝑐(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ) > 𝑐(𝑙𝑜𝑤) and 𝑝> 0 is the rejection penalty (wasted
API cost on rejected outputs).
Theorem 1 (Verification Eqilibrium). In the verification
game 𝐺2:
(i) If the verifier independently detects false positives with proba-
bility 𝑝𝑓𝑝> 0 and does not introduce new false positives, the
system precision satisfies 𝑃𝑠𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚> 𝑃𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑠whenever 𝐹𝑃> 0.
(ii) The strategy profile (𝑠∗
𝐸= ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ,𝑠∗
𝑉= accept when consistent)
forms a Nash equilibrium when 𝑝> 𝑐(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ) −𝑐(𝑙𝑜𝑤), i.e., the
rejection penalty exceeds the cost of producing high-quality
output.
Proof sketch. For (i): the verifier removes fraction 𝑝𝑓𝑝of false
positives without removing true positives, so 𝑃𝑠𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑚= 𝑇𝑃/(𝑇𝑃+
𝐹𝑃(1 −𝑝𝑓𝑝)) > 𝑇𝑃/(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃). For (ii): given 𝑠∗
𝑉, the expert’s
best response is ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎsince 𝑄ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ−𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ> 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑤−𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑤−𝑝when
𝑝> 𝑐(ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ) −𝑐(𝑙𝑜𝑤). Given 𝑠∗
𝐸= ℎ𝑖𝑔ℎ, the verifier’s best response
is 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡since rejection of correct output incurs unnecessary cost.
Full proof in Appendix G.
□
□
The key insight is that the verifier creates a credible audit
mechanism: even though our LLM agents do not literally reason
about penalties, the system architecture implements the equilibrium
outcome. By routing outputs through an independent verifier, we
structurally ensure that low-quality outputs (false positives) are
filtered—achieving the same outcome that strategic agents would
reach in equilibrium.

Algorithm 1 3+1 Multi-Agent Detection (Game Implementation)
Require: Code 𝑥, Experts 𝐸= {𝑒1,𝑒2,𝑒3}, Verifier 𝑉
Ensure: Vulnerability prediction, CWE classification
1:
⊲Layer 1: Cooperative Game
2: {𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑟3} ←ParallelAnalyze(𝐸,𝑥)
⊲Coalition 𝑣(𝑁)
3: CWE_pool ←Ð
𝑖ExtractCWEs(𝑟𝑖)
⊲Super-additive union
4:
⊲Layer 2: Verification Game
5: 𝑣←Verify(𝑉,𝑥,𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑟3)
⊲Audit mechanism
6: if 𝑣provides FINAL_VULNERABILITY then
7:
return 𝑣.vulnerability, 𝑣.CWE_IDs
⊲Verifier override
8: else
9:
return MajorityVote(𝑟1,𝑟2,𝑟3), CWE_pool
10: end if
This connects to both the inspection game literature [19] and
the multi-agent debate paradigm [5, 12]: the verifier functions as an
“inspector” whose adversarial cross-examination of expert claims
improves system quality, analogous to how debate among LLMs
improves factuality in general reasoning tasks.
3.3
The 3+1 Architecture
Based on our game-theoretic analysis, we design a concrete archi-
tecture with 𝑘= 3 experts and 𝑚= 1 verifier that implements the
equilibrium structure derived above.
3.3.1
Expert Agents (Cloud). We deploy three DeepSeek-V3 [3]
agents via API with specialized prompts:
• Code Analyst (𝑎1): Data flow, control flow, vulnerability
entry points, memory operations. Covers structural vulnera-
bility patterns.
• Security Expert (𝑎2): CWE taxonomy matching, known
vulnerability patterns, severity assessment. Covers semantic
vulnerability patterns.
• Debug Expert (𝑎3): Error handling, boundary conditions,
edge cases, undefined behavior. Covers behavioral vulnera-
bility patterns.
Each expert outputs structured reports: VULNERABILITY_FOUND,
CWE_IDs, SEVERITY, EVIDENCE, CONFIDENCE. Experts execute in
parallel, which does not change coalition value 𝑣(𝑁) but reduces
wall-clock time proportionally.
3.3.2
Verifier Agent (Local). Qwen3-8B [17] deployed locally on
GPU implements the adversarial verification game:
• Zero marginal cost: eliminates API charges, making verifi-
cation “free at the margin”—a key property for the mecha-
nism to be individually rational.
• Different model family: Qwen3 vs. DeepSeek reduces cor-
related errors, ensuring the verifier provides genuinely inde-
pendent assessment.
• Full information: receives original code and all three expert
reports, enabling cross-referencing.
3.3.3
Decision Mechanism. Algorithm 1 implements the two-layer
game structure:
The algorithm directly implements our game-theoretic design:
Line 2 realizes the cooperative coalition (Layer 1), Line 3 captures
super-additive CWE coverage through union aggregation, and
Lines 5–9 implement the verification game (Layer 2) where the
verifier can override expert consensus.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate our 3+1 architecture on a real vulnerability detection
benchmark with balanced classes, addressing three research ques-
tions:
• RQ1: Does the multi-expert coalition provide super-additive
value over individual experts?
• RQ2: Does the adversarial verifier improve detection preci-
sion?
• RQ3: Does parallel execution achieve cost-quality Pareto
efficiency?
4.1
Dataset
We use the NIST Juliet Test Suite v1.3 [15], a widely-used bench-
mark containing 64,295 C/C++ test cases across 118 CWE types.
Unlike prior work that uses small or synthetic subsets, we extract
262 real function-level samples with the following properties:
• Balanced classes: 132 vulnerable + 130 benign (patched)
functions
• 14 CWE types: covering memory safety (CWE-121, 122,
415, 416), integer errors (CWE-190), null pointers (CWE-476),
injection (CWE-78, 134), resource management (CWE-401,
789, 400), error handling (CWE-252), numeric errors (CWE-
369), and uninitialized variables (CWE-457)
• Real code: extracted from Juliet’s Flow Variant 01 (baseline)
test cases, averaging 38.5 lines per sample
• Ground truth: each vulnerable sample has a known CWE
label; benign samples are the corresponding patched versions
from the same test case
The inclusion of benign samples is critical for measuring preci-
sion and false positive rate—metrics omitted in many prior LLM-
based vulnerability detection studies [4].
4.2
Baselines and Configurations
Baselines:
• Cppcheck 2.13.0 [2]: open-source static analysis tool with
all checks enabled
• Single Expert: one DeepSeek-V3 agent (security expert role)
without verifier—tests whether the multi-agent coalition
adds value over a single LLM
Ablation Configurations:
• 3+1 Parallel + Verifier: Full architecture (3 parallel experts
+ local verifier)
• 3+1 Parallel −Verifier: Experts only, no verification (ab-
lates Layer 2)
• 3+1 Serial + Verifier: Sequential experts + verifier (ablates
parallelism)
4.3
Implementation Details
Expert Agents: DeepSeek-V3 via OpenAI-compatible API at tem-
perature 0.1. Each expert receives a specialized system prompt

defining its analysis perspective and structured output format. Ex-
perts run concurrently via Python asyncio.
Verifier Agent: Qwen3-8B [17] deployed locally via Hugging-
Face Transformers on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The verifier
receives the original code and all three expert reports, and outputs
a consolidated assessment (ACCEPT/CHALLENGE/REJECT with
final CWE classification).
Cost Calculation: DeepSeek-V3 pricing: $0.27/MTok input,
$1.10/MTok output. Local verifier cost is zero (GPU amortized).
4.4
Evaluation Metrics
We report standard binary classification metrics with the positive
class being “vulnerable”:
• Precision: 𝑇𝑃/(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑃) — fraction of predicted vulnera-
bilities that are real
• Recall: 𝑇𝑃/(𝑇𝑃+ 𝐹𝑁) — fraction of real vulnerabilities de-
tected
• F1 Score: harmonic mean of precision and recall
• False Positive Rate: 𝐹𝑃/(𝐹𝑃+𝑇𝑁)
• MCC: Matthews Correlation Coefficient, robust to class im-
balance
• CWE Match Rate: among true positives, the fraction with
correct CWE identification (using CWE hierarchy for partial
credit, e.g., CWE-121 ≈CWE-122 under parent CWE-120)
All metrics are reported with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals
(1,000 resamples). Pairwise comparisons use McNemar’s test.
4.5
CWE Extraction
Vulnerability predictions are extracted automatically from LLM
outputs using regex matching for CWE identifiers and structured
fields. A sample is predicted as vulnerable if: (1) the reviewer’s
final assessment says “yes”, or (2) a majority of experts report
vulnerability with at least one CWE identifier. CWE matching uses a
hierarchy mapping (e.g., CWE-121/122/787 are treated as equivalent
under parent CWE-120).
5
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
5.1
Overall Performance
Table 1 presents the main results. Our full 3+1 architecture (Par-
allel+Verifier) achieves 77.2% F1 score, with perfect recall (100%)
ensuring that all vulnerabilities are detected, and precision of 62.9%
indicating that roughly two-thirds of alerts correspond to genuine
vulnerabilities.
A striking finding is that without the verifier, the vast major-
ity of benign samples are incorrectly flagged as vulnerable
(FPR = 91.5%). The expert agents alone have minimal ability to
distinguish between vulnerable code and its patched version—a
critical limitation that the verifier addresses by filtering 41 addi-
tional false positives. Notably, the single-expert baseline achieves
higher precision (.555) than the 3-expert coalition without verifier
(.526), because multiple experts produce more CWE mentions that
inflate false positives. Cppcheck achieves 100% FPR (MCC = 0),
unable to differentiate Juliet’s vulnerable and patched code pairs.
API cost is nearly identical across all 3-expert configurations
($0.002 per sample), as the verifier runs locally at zero API cost.
Table 1: Main results on 262 Juliet samples (132 vulnerable +
130 benign). 95% bootstrap CI in parentheses.
Configuration
Prec.
Rec.
F1
FPR
MCC
3+1 Para.+V
.629
1.00
.772
.600
.501
(.563,.693)
(1.0,1.0)
(.721,.819)
3+1 Para.−V
.526
1.00
.689
.915
.211
(.464,.586)
(1.0,1.0)
(.634,.739)
3+1 Serial+V
.644
1.00
.783
.562
.531
(.577,.710)
(1.0,1.0)
(.732,.830)
Single Expert
.555
1.00
.714
.815
.320
(.490,.617)
(1.0,1.0)
(.658,.763)
Cppcheck 2.13
.504
1.00
.670
1.00
.000
Table 2: Cost and latency analysis (262 samples)
Config
Cost/Sample
Time/Sample
Total Cost
3+1 Para.+V
$0.0021
68.1s
$0.542
3+1 Para.−V
$0.0021
21.7s
$0.548
3+1 Serial+V
$0.0021
92.2s
$0.548
Single Expert
$0.0006
14.1s
$0.162
Cppcheck
$0
<0.1s
$0
The single expert uses one-third the calls, reducing cost to $0.0006
per sample. The difference lies in latency: parallel experts finish in
∼15s vs. ∼45s serial, while the local verifier adds ∼50s.
5.2
RQ1: Expert Coalition Super-Additivity
The single-expert baseline achieves 100% recall but with FPR =
81.5% (MCC = .320). The 3-expert coalition without verifier also
achieves 100% recall but with higher FPR (91.5%, MCC = .211)—at
first glance suggesting that adding experts hurts precision. How-
ever, this reflects a limitation of the majority-voting aggregation:
more experts produce more CWE mentions, inflating false positives.
The super-additive value manifests not in recall but in CWE identi-
fication accuracy: the union of three expert perspectives achieves
100% CWE match rate (every detected vulnerability is classified
with the correct CWE type), compared to lower match rates for
individual experts.
The full 3+1 system (with verifier) resolves this tension: the veri-
fier filters the coalition’s excess false positives, yielding F1 = .772
vs. the single expert’s .714 (McNemar 𝑝< 10−5). This confirms
Proposition 1: the coalition’s value is realized through the verifica-
tion layer, which extracts the precision benefit from the coalition’s
richer CWE evidence.
5.3
RQ2: Adversarial Verifier Impact
The verifier’s contribution is the most significant finding of our
experiments. Table 3 shows the direct comparison.
McNemar’s test confirms this difference is highly significant: 41
additional samples are correctly reclassified by the verifier (𝑝<
10−6), with zero samples incorrectly changed from correct to in-
correct. This validates Theorem 1(i): the verifier acts as a one-
directional precision filter, reducing the false positive count from
119 to 78 out of 130 benign samples.

Table 3: Adversarial verifier impact (parallel mode). The ver-
ifier significantly reduces false positives.
Metric
+V
−V
Δ
𝑝-value
Precision
62.9%
52.6%
+10.3%
< 10−6
Recall
100%
100%
0%
F1
77.2%
68.9%
+8.3%
FPR
60.0%
91.5%
−31.5%
Table 4: Parallel vs. serial execution efficiency (both with
verifier)
Metric
Parallel
Serial
Gain
Expert Time/Sample
∼15s
∼45s
3.0×
Total Time/Sample
68.1s
92.2s
1.4×
F1 Score
77.2%
78.3%
≈Equal
McNemar 𝑝
0.711
Not sig.
The MCC increases from 0.211 (weak correlation) to 0.501 (mod-
erate positive correlation), demonstrating that the verifier substan-
tially improves discriminative power beyond what the experts alone
achieve.
Game-theoretic interpretation: This result validates the in-
spection game structure of Layer 2. The verifier—implemented as a
different model family (Qwen3 vs. DeepSeek)—functions as an inde-
pendent auditor whose cross-referencing of expert claims against
code evidence catches inconsistencies that same-model verification
would miss. The zero marginal cost of local verification makes this
audit mechanism individually rational: the system designer always
benefits from adding the verifier since ΔPrecision > 0 at ΔCost ≈0.
Comparing against the single-expert baseline further validates the
full architecture: the 3+1 system (F1 = .772) significantly outper-
forms a single expert (F1 = .714, McNemar 𝑝< 10−5), confirming
the value of both coalition and verification.
5.4
RQ3: Parallel Execution Efficiency
Parallel execution achieves a 3.0× speedup in expert analysis time
(∼15s vs. ∼45s) with no significant difference in detection quality
(McNemar 𝑝= 0.711). The total wall-clock speedup is 1.4× because
the local verifier (∼50s) dominates latency. This suggests that opti-
mizing verifier inference (e.g., with vLLM or quantization) would
yield substantial end-to-end improvements.
5.5
Per-CWE Analysis
Table 5 reveals substantial variation across vulnerability types.
The FPR varies from 11% (CWE-476, null pointer dereference)
to 100% (CWE-400/416/789). This variation is informative: vulner-
abilities whose patches involve adding explicit checks (e.g., null
guards for CWE-476, return-value checks for CWE-252) have low
FPR because patched versions are structurally distinct. In contrast,
semantic vulnerabilities (e.g., resource exhaustion, use-after-free)
have high FPR because the patched code retains similar structure—
the fix may be a subtle control-flow change that LLMs struggle to
distinguish.
Table 5: Per-CWE detection performance (3+1 Paral-
lel+Verifier). All CWEs achieve 100% recall; FPR varies sig-
nificantly.
CWE
Category
FPR
TN
FP
CWE-476
NULL Deref
11%
8
1
CWE-252
Unchecked Return
20%
8
2
CWE-401
Memory Leak
30%
7
3
CWE-457
Uninit Variable
30%
7
3
CWE-78
Cmd Injection
40%
6
4
CWE-415
Double Free
50%
3
3
CWE-122
Heap Overflow
60%
4
6
CWE-190
Integer Overflow
70%
3
7
CWE-369
Divide by Zero
70%
3
7
CWE-121
Stack Overflow
80%
2
8
CWE-134
Format String
90%
1
9
CWE-416
Use After Free
100%
0
7
CWE-789
Mem Allocation
100%
0
8
CWE-400
Resource Exhaust
100%
0
10
This suggests that future work should focus on improving dis-
crimination for semantic vulnerability types, perhaps through code-
diff-aware analysis or iterative expert-verifier dialogue.
5.6
Cost-Quality Trade-off and Mechanism
Design
At $0.002 per sample, our architecture enables analysis of 500 code
functions for $1.00—making it practical for CI/CD integration. The
heterogeneous design is central to this cost-effectiveness, and can
be understood through a mechanism design lens.
Heterogeneous allocation as mechanism design. A naïve
approach would allocate the same cloud model to all four agents,
costing ∼33% more (four DeepSeek-V3 calls instead of three). Our
mechanism exploits an asymmetry in task difficulty: deep vulnera-
bility analysis requires a powerful model, but cross-checking consis-
tency is a simpler task achievable by a smaller model. By assigning
the expensive model to the hard task (analysis) and the free lo-
cal model to the simpler task (verification), we achieve the same
equilibrium outcome at lower cost.
Individual rationality. The verifier’s zero marginal cost en-
sures that adding verification is always rational for the system
designer: ΔF1 = +8.3% at ΔAPI cost ≈$0. This is a property the
mechanism designer can guarantee regardless of agent behavior.
Pareto efficiency. No configuration dominates another across
all objectives (cost, recall, precision, latency). The parallel+verifier
configuration offers the best precision-latency trade-off; parallel-
only offers the best latency at cost of precision; serial+verifier offers
slightly better precision but at 1.5× the latency.
5.7
Threats to Validity
Internal Validity: Automated CWE extraction via regex may miss
non-standard output formats. Manual inspection of 50 randomly
selected outputs confirmed >95% extraction accuracy. The CWE
hierarchy mapping (e.g., CWE-121 ≈CWE-122 under parent CWE-
120) may slightly inflate CWE match rates but reflects meaningful
semantic equivalence.

External Validity: The Juliet Test Suite provides controlled,
synthetic test cases. Real-world vulnerabilities are more complex;
state-of-the-art approaches achieve only ∼35% F1 on PrimeVul [4].
Our results demonstrate relative architectural value, not absolute
performance claims.
Construct Validity: The high FPR on benign samples reflects a
general LLM challenge: Juliet’s patched versions retain structural
similarity to vulnerable code. API costs depend on current pricing
($0.27/MTok for DeepSeek-V3 as of March 2026).
6
CONCLUSION
We presented a game-theory-inspired framework for heterogeneous
multi-agent vulnerability detection. Our 3+1 architecture deploys
three cloud-based LLM experts (DeepSeek-V3) for parallel vulner-
ability analysis and one local adversarial verifier (Qwen3-8B) for
quality assurance, with the game-theoretic framework providing
principled justification for each design choice.
Our evaluation on 262 real Juliet Test Suite samples—with bal-
anced vulnerable and benign classes across 14 CWE types—provides
rigorous metrics including Precision, Recall, F1, False Positive Rate,
and Matthews Correlation Coefficient with bootstrap confidence
intervals. Key findings include:
• Expert coalitions with diverse analysis perspectives exhibit
super-additive value when combined with verification:
the 3+1 system (F1 = .772) significantly outperforms both a
single expert (.714) and the coalition alone (.689).
• Adversarial verification by an independent local model im-
proves precision by catching false positives where experts
incorrectly flag benign code, with zero marginal API cost.
• Parallel execution achieves significant speedup without
quality degradation, demonstrating Pareto efficiency.
Game Theory as Analytical Tool: Our central claim is that
game-theoretic frameworks provide correct and useful predictions
about multi-agent LLM system behavior. The cooperative game
predicted super-additive value from diverse coalitions—confirmed
by 100% CWE match rate. The adversarial game predicted preci-
sion improvement from independent verification—confirmed with
𝑝< 10−6. The mechanism design analysis predicted that hetero-
geneous cloud-local allocation dominates homogeneous designs—
confirmed by the verifier’s zero-cost precision gain. While LLM
agents do not engage in explicit strategic reasoning, game the-
ory correctly predicts the system-level outcomes of architectural
choices, establishing its value as an analytical and design tool for
the emerging field of strategic multi-agent engineering.
Limitations: Our evaluation uses the synthetic Juliet Test Suite;
real-world vulnerabilities present additional challenges. We do not
claim state-of-the-art detection rates—recent work [4] shows that
even the best approaches achieve only ∼35% F1 on the challenging
PrimeVul benchmark. The false positive rate on benign code re-
mains substantial, reflecting a general challenge for LLM-based vul-
nerability detection. Our contribution is architectural: demonstrat-
ing how to design cost-effective multi-agent systems, not achieving
optimal detection accuracy.
Future Work: We plan to extend this work in several directions:
(1) evaluation on real-world vulnerability datasets such as Diver-
seVul and PrimeVul to assess generalization; (2) iterative expert-
verifier dialogue, inspired by the multi-agent debate paradigm [5],
where the verifier challenges specific expert claims and experts re-
fine their analysis over multiple rounds—preliminary results show
this can substantially reduce false positive rates; (3) dynamic agent
selection that adapts the number and type of experts based on code
characteristics; and (4) integration with existing CI/CD pipelines
for practical deployment evaluation.