Too Private to Tell:
Practical Token Theft Attacks on Apple Intelligence
Haoling (Henry) Zhou, Shixuan Zhao, Chao Wang, Zhiqiang Lin
The Ohio State University
{zhou.3890, zhao.3289, wang.15147, lin.3021}@osu.edu
Abstract
Apple Intelligence is a generative AI (GenAI) service provided by Apple on its devices.
While offering a similar set of features as other similar GenAI services, Apple Intelligence is
claimed to be designed with an extra focus on user security and privacy through a two-stage
authentication and authorisation design using anonymous access tokens. In this paper, we
present our investigation into this token issuance mechanism with a goal to reveal possible
vulnerabilities using traffic analysis, reverse engineering, and cross comparison with Apple’s
public documentation. Specifically, we present the Serpent attack, the first practical cross-device
token replay attack against Apple Intelligence that allows the attacker to steal the access tokens
from the victim’s device and utilise them on a different device, with all usage rate-limited against
the victim. We have achieved successful attacks on the latest macOS 26 Tahoe and demonstrated
that an attacker who has even used up its own allowance, can immediately regain access to
Apple Intelligence service. We have responsibly disclosed the vulnerabilities to the vendors and
received confirmation from Apple with CVE assigned and bounty given. Our results highlight
a general lesson for built-in AI services: Anonymising identity does not by itself make the AI
service secure; Enforcing non-transferability requires cryptographic binding to the rightful user.
1
Introduction
Apple Intelligence is a generative AI (GenAI) service offered by Apple on their *OS devices [5].
When compared with other platforms, Apple Intelligence has a unique focus on users’ security
and privacy. For GenAI requests that need to be executed on Apple’s servers, Apple introduces
a sophisticated workflow and an infrastructure called Private Cloud Compute (PCC) to achieve
the security and privacy guarantees [30]. In particular, Apple significantly limits what the server
can know about a particular user and device [31], prioritising unlinkability to better protect user
privacy.
Like most GenAI services, authentication is needed to access Apple Intelligence. Common GenAI
services such as OpenAI use access tokens (e.g., API keys) to verify that a request comes from an
authorised user [26]. The token is also used to count usage towards a specific user for quota limitation
or billing purposes. On Apple Intelligence, the design is further developed in a way that can achieve
the said authentication without revealing the identity of a user by issuing anonymous access tokens
with a two-stage mechanism [31]. In the first stage, the service client will contact Apple’s PCC
Identity Service to prove that the user device is an Apple device. The PCC Identity Service will issue
a long-lived Token Granting Token (TGT), which is specific to the device and the user. In the second
stage, the client sends the TGT to Apple’s Token Granting Service, which will issue a batch of single-
use and One-Time Tokens (OTTs) to authenticate each request. Except for the PCC Identity Service,
1
arXiv:2604.15637v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

all other Apple Intelligence services are proxied through third party to hide identifiable information
of the user, making the two-staged authentication not traceable back to a specific user or device.
Since access tokens grant access to services, they have value and are inevitably targeted by
malicious attackers. In fact, token leakage for online services has been a severe issue over the
years, and the reasons can range from plaintext leakage directly on open-source platforms [22,25] to
exposure on the client side due to insecure designs [46,47]. If a malicious attacker is able to get the
access token, it is capable of pretending to be the victim and use the service in its own interest but
have all usages counted towards the victim’s bill. The cost of such leak can be high [16] and could
be even more severe on modern GenAIs.
Due to the nature of Apple Intelligence services and how widely available they are on Apple
devices, the impact of an attack against Apple Intelligence’s access tokens and the consequences are
significantly more serious than previous attacks targeting other platforms: First, the victim, as the
owner of the access tokens, is a regular consumer with no professional knowledge in cybersecurity,
while previous attacks targeted keys owned by apps developed by professional developers. Second,
Apple Intelligence’s access tokens are essentially bearer tokens, which means whoever possesses
them will be granted access to services. Along with the no login feature, there is no mechanism
to distinguish an attacker who owns the stolen bearer token from a regular user with a legitimate
device and rightfully issued token unless the authentication requires device information. Third,
there is no proper way for a victim to revoke the access tokens, meaning that once the tokens are
stolen, the victim will need to wait until the next scheduled token refresh, while in previous attacks
the victim could revoke an access token at any time. If such an attack exists and is easy enough for
large scale deployment, an attacker would be able to harvest these tokens to form a pool of endless
GenAI resources, all under cover of the privacy and security offered by Apple itself. Naturally, we
ask the question:
Is it possible for an attacker to easily steal the tokens from a victim’s Mac and use them
on another Mac to disguise it as the victim?
Apple has been well-known for their security protections on their devices [37] and a user would
certainly have expected the same level of protection for these access tokens. However, we have to
unfortunately give a yes to the above question. In this paper, we present Serpent, an attack that
breaks the intended non-transferability of Apple Intelligence credentials. A malicious adversary can
extract bearer access tokens from a victim’s Mac and replay them on another machine, thereby
gaining service access and spending quota under the victim’s entitlement. We have implemented
the attack and demonstrated the feasibility on the latest macOS 26 Tahoe. We demonstrated that
an attacker who has used up its own request allowance can immediately regain access to Apple
Intelligence services by importing the access tokens stolen from a victim Mac. We have ethically
disclosed this vulnerability to Apple with details of the attack.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• Systematic Understanding. We performed a systematic anatomy of the authentication flow
of Apple Intelligence platform with traffic decryption and analysis, reverse engineering, and cross
comparison with public documentation from Apple. Our findings pinpointed the critical steps
in the authentication flow and led to the discovery of its vulnerability.
• Practical Attack. We proposed Serpent, the first attack against Apple Intelligence’s authen-
tication process with minimal end-user interactions that has the potential to be deployed at scale.
We demonstrated that the attacker can use a victim’s tokens at will even if the attacker’s own
allowance has been used up.
2

User Device
Token Granting Service 
(OTT Issuance)
PCC Gateway 
(TGT Validation)
PCC Identity Service
(TGT Issuance)
OHTTP
Relay
Device Unidentifiable
Device Identifiable
PCC Inference Node 
(OTT Validation)
Figure 1: Security components of Apple Intelligence
• Countermeasures. In addition to disclosing the attack to Apple and other vendors, receiving
confirmation as well as a bug bounty with CVE assigned from Apple, we also discussed why
Serpent would work to offer insights into potential mitigations and techniques that can be
applied to similar scenarios. The idea of Apple’s fix in its macOS 26.2 security patch was closely
related to one of our proposed approaches.
2
Background
2.1
Apple Intelligence and PCC
Apple Intelligence is a GenAI service offered by Apple on macOS, iOS, iPadOS, and visionOS. It is
an integrated component of the OS itself on the client side, and can run autonomously for tasks like
summarising the notifications or be invoked by the user for tasks like generating pictures [5]. While
several lightweight tasks can be done using the on-device models, complex requests require cloud
services provided by Apple to offload the heavy computation.
Different from conventional GenAI services, Apple introduced Private Cloud Compute (PCC),
a design that combines a privacy-preserving workflow that hides a user’s identifiable information
and an iOS-like inference environment to guard the execution against attackers. We illustrate key
security measures of PCC documented by Apple [31] in Figure 1 which include:
• OHTTP Relay. Apple’s PCC employs a variant of Oblivious HTTP (OHTTP) protocol [38] in
a similar fashion as their iCloud Private Relay [4], which is serviced by third parties including
Cloudflare and Fastly. Since all the requests are sent via this relay, Apple Intelligence services
cannot tell identifiable metadata like the user’s IP addresses. All user interactions with Apple
Intelligence services go through this relay except for the PCC Identity Service, which is used to
verify if the user is using an Apple device eligible for Apple Intelligence.
• Access Tokens. In the design of PCC, Apple uses a two-stage token issuing mechanism to achieve
a privacy-preserving authentication workflow, following the protocol RFC 9578 Privacy Pass [11].
Apple separates the token issuing by an anonymous but per-device Token Granting Token (TGT)
and a single-use, totally anonymous One-Time Token (OTT). This detaches the device eligibility
3

verification from the actual usage authentication and therefore makes each request unlinkable
from the actual user. Since this flow is highly related to Serpent, we will introduce more details
in Section 3.
• PCC Nodes. A user’s request is handled by a special kind of server called a PCC node. A PCC
node is essentially a Mac running a customised iOS but has minimised components installed and
a strong restriction on software executed on it. Hardware wise, a PCC node is manufactured
with supply chain attack prevention and has a tamper switch activated once it is sealed in the
factory. Software wise, it uses security features similar to those found in iPhones [31]: SPTM,
TXM, AMFI, etc., which are well studied in previous literatures such as [37].
In short, PCC detaches the user verification and authentication, hides user identifiable information
behind an OHTTP relay, and uses tightly controlled hardware and software to ensure the security
and privacy guarantees.
2.2
Privacy Pass
In Apple Intelligence, the authentication is based on Privacy Pass. Privacy Pass [11] is an authenti-
cation scheme designed to detach the authentication process, which involves sensitive identifiable
information, from using a service. Conventional authentication schemes offer an access token after
verifying a user who will use the token to access the services. This means that a token is linked to a
specific user which can be used for usage tracing, leading to privacy concerns. To solve this privacy
issue, Privacy Pass was introduced [14].
In Privacy Pass, a user sends in authentication information for eligibility verification along with
an encrypted unsigned token. The authentication service, after verifying the information, signs
the encrypted unsigned token using a blind signature based on Oblivious Pseudorandom Functions
(OPRF) [17]. A blind signature allows the signer to sign a piece of encrypted data without the need
to decrypt it [10]. The user can then decrypt the now blindly-signed token and use it to access the
service. For the service, while it can verify that this token is properly signed, since when performing
the authentication it was in an encrypted form, it cannot know who the user actually is other than
the token bearer is eligible to use the service.
2.3
macOS Keychain
Keychain [7] is a special database infrastructure on Apple *OS systems for the storage of passwords,
access tokens and certificates. Keychain is available to all applications on the system with APIs for
adding, deleting, retrieving and updating items given that both the application and the user are
authorised to do so. There are four ‘keychain’ databases used for different purposes: The ‘login
keychain’ is bound to a local user for local storage accessible only by that user. The ‘iCloud keychain’
is bound to an Apple account and is synced across the specific user’s devices. Any process accessing
the iCloud keychain needs to designate a restricted entitlement that is signed by Apple [1,2] and
enforced by the AMFI in the kernel [27]. The ‘System keychain’ is for items shared across the
system which is readable by all users but modifiable only by sudoers. The ‘System Root keychain’
is immutable and stores critical information such as root certificates. When an application tries
to access a keychain item, an authentication prompt will pop up for the user to grant permission
given that the user has access to that keychain item in the first place. Keychain is known to be a
commonly targeted infrastructure with many known vulnerabilities [40,48].
4

User Device
Token Granting
Service
PCC Gateway
PCC Identity
Service
Device information
TGT
TGT
Batch of OTTs
Device 
eligibility 
check
TGT signature 
check
Fraud detection
PCC Node
OTT
OTT check
TGT + Request
TGT check
(Not Enabled)
Request handling
TGT + Request
Results
Device Identifiable
TGT Issuance
OTT Issuance
Request
Device Unidentifiable
But Linkable
Device Unlinkable
Device Linkable?
Figure 2: Authentication protocol of Apple Intelligence
3
Authentication and Authorisation Workflow Anatomy
To offer a comprehensive understanding of the root cause of the Serpent attack, we present our
detailed analysis of the authentication and authorisation process of Apple Intelligence’s request
workflow. Our analysis is based on macOS 26.0 (25A353) ‘Tahoe’ running on a Mac mini with an
M4 chip.
3.1
Device Eligibility and TGT Issuance
Before a user can initiate a request to the Apple Intelligence services in the cloud, it has to first
be verified for its eligibility by proving to the PCC Identity Service that it is an authentic piece
of Apple hardware running a proper OS. In this step, the user will obtain a Token Granting Token
(TGT) from the PCC Identity Service which follows the RFC 9578 Privacy Pass protocol.
The user that tries to access Apple Intelligence will first create a request for TGT issuance. Per
Apple’s documentation [31], Apple followed RFC 9578 using RFC 9474 RSA Blind Signature as
the technical foundation for TGT. The format and a real TGT payload obtained from our traffic
analysis are illustrated in Figure 3. The TGT request contains token information that is packaged in
a blinded message format and the device information. The token information is essentially the RFC
9578’s challenge digest, nonce, and token type. By reverse engineering the NetworkServiceProxy
5

a6e854030
a6e854040
a6e854050
a6e854060
a6e854070
a6e854080
a6e854090
a6e8540a0
...
a6e854180
a6e854190
00 02 21 27 7a 98 f4 08 cd 0a 2a c9 90 47 90 fb
be 85 1f 46 e0 5f 06 65 1b 5c 18 b0 e6 29 3a 0c
c0 d8 91 12 69 be 0d b2 71 9d 26 5d ca 90 3a 9a
a1 a0 c3 f0 ff 15 c4 1d 5a 92 26 72 f8 c3 37 04
f0 d7 54 ef 06 c0 74 ec 33 15 fc 9e 0e b3 84 49
a6 53 5b b0 db fa 8a 78 68 a5 02 17 a5 70 4c 13
a6 20 47 46 6e 2d 56 27 ec e0 58 b5 5b d2 c8 af
ef 54 cc ec 5b 3f bf f3 c2 b3 1e 0b fa 58 1a 13
...
00 02 54 87 02 41 00 b5 ae 90 80 62 4a cf 29 79
6d 72
struct {
uint16_t token_type;
uint8_t nonce[32];
uint8_t challenge_digest[32];
uint8_t token_key_id[32];
uint8_t authenticator[Nk];
} Token;
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Signed
Portion
Signature
Figure 3: The token format of TGT and OTT following RFC 9578. The red fields are
unique fields across different tokens. The green field can be the same depending on
the key selected. A colour-coded example of a TGT extracted from our Mac mini is
provided below.
private framework, we found that the challenge was a byte sequence obtained from the private API
NSPPrivateAccessTokenChallenge which follows the Token Challenge Structure in RFC 9577 [28],
with the issuer_name set to the TGT’s issuer endpoint tis.gateway.icloud.com and the rest
filled with 0. This challenge appears to be static so the only difference between each TGT (even
across different devices) comes from the nonce portion of the TGT.
3.2
Service Authorisation And OTT Issuance
Once the user obtains the TGT, the rest of its interactions with the Apple Intelligence platform no
longer requires device eligibility validation. To achieve usage limitation, each request a user makes
needs a One-Time Token (OTT) which is redeemed using the TGT from the Token Granting Service.
Here, the user is hidden from the Token Granting Service via OHTTP relay. We suspect the reason
for using another stage of token is that while TGT is not linked to the actual device, the TGT itself
can be somehow treated as an identifier itself, causing privacy concern. By redeeming TGT into
OTTs, these OTTs are now completely unlinked from a single client because they differ every time.
In practice, we found that OTTs are fetched in batches with a target amount of 50 OTTs cached
in a user’s device. The Token Granting Service signs the OTTs with an OTT key which has a
shorter lifespan compared with TGT. OTTs are also stored on the device and the user can spend
one token per request in the future. We can also observe that OTTs are also not bound to who they
were issued to.
Other than service authorisation, the OTT issuance process also serves as the rate limiter which
manages each user’s quota allowance. Our tests show that Apple Intelligence has a quota limit of
roughly several millions of tokens a day per user. Once the quota is used up, a user has to wait
until roughly the next day before it can receive any new OTTs, essentially blocking the user from
continuing to use the service.
6

/CloudBoard/Sources/CloudBoardJobHelperCore/Configuration.swift
var enforceTGTValidation: Bool {
get { self._enforceTGTValidation ?? false }
set { self._enforceTGTValidation = newValue }
}
42
43
44
45
/CloudBoard/Sources/CloudBoardJobHelperCore/Request Handling/WorkloadJobManager.swift
private func validateToken(tgt: Data, ...) throws {
do {
... // metrics collection
try self.tgtValidator.validateTokenGrantingToken(tgt, ...)
... // log
} catch {
... // metrics collection
if self.enforceTGTValidation {
... // log
throw error
} else {
... // log
}
}
}
1633
1634
...
1641
...
1647
...
1649
...
1656
1657
...
1664
1665
1666
Actual path taken
Default to false
Validation logic in a do-catch block
Path not taken
Figure 4: Swift code logics of CloudBoard in PCC showing the default result bypass
behaviour of TGT validation.
3.3
Authentication in User Request Handling
First Stage: OTT Validation on PCC Gateway. After a user receives both TGT and OTTs, a
user can issue GenAI requests to Apple Intelligence under the protection of the PCC scheme. Even
though the inside payload is already encrypted, Apple still uses TLS to encrypt the entire package
including the OTT. This package is relayed via the OHTTP relay and will first arrive at the PCC
Gateway, which is a gateway server that is not allowed to touch the user’s data. PCC Gateway
will decrypt the outer TLS layer and validate the OTT. The OTT is validated against the OTT’s
signing key. If passed, the OTT is considered as consumed and can’t be used again, and the entire
package (likely including the OTT, will be discussed below) is sent to the PCC node that handles
the actual request.
Second Stage: (Optional) TGT Validation on PCC Nodes. On the PCC node that handles
the request (or the PCC proxy node when multiple nodes are involved), the encrypted payload is
decrypted to reveal the TGT and the user prompt. Here, an optional validation of the TGT can
happen to verify that the TGT is valid. According to Apple’s documentation [31], this validation is
not currently implemented but may be used in the future for abuse mitigations. However, from
the source code provided, we actually found out that the verification has been implemented and
is verified for each request as shown in Figure 4. However, there is a configurable option called
enforceTGTValidation that defaults to false that suppresses the error throwing, meaning that
even if an invalid TGT is attached and the TGT validation fails, the error will not trigger an
abortion in the processing.
3.4
Token Validation and Expiry
One of the critical procedures omitted from Apple’s documentation is how the tokens are validated
and how the expiry is determined. We summarise our discovery via reverse engineering, empirical
tests and source code analysis. While the validation on Token Granting Service is not publicly
documented, since the token validation is mostly cryptographic operations, we believe it follows a
similar routine as the validation on PCC nodes.
7

Token Validation. The token validation process is similar to the RFC 9578’s specification. In the
method validate of TokenGrantingTokenValidator of the CloudBoard on PCC nodes, it first
filters the keys in its key set that are currently still valid by the key’s validStart and validEnd
properties. From the filtered key set, the method will match the tokenKeyID field (known as the
token_key_id in RFC 9578) with the valid keys. If a key matches, the key will be used to verify the
signed portion against the signature (authenticator) of the token. If the signature is accepted, the
token is considered as valid. For TGTs, since the nonce is randomly generated, a valid signature is
considered as sufficient by Apple. While in Section 3.1 we observed that the nonce might be derived
from device information, the nonce itself was not verified for any meaning during the validation
process. For OTTs, an additional validation is needed.
Token Expiry. From the above analysis and the data structure in Figure 3, we can easily observe
that there is no token expiry information in the token itself. The expiry is, instead, enforced by the key
used to sign the token. This means that unless keys are generated at all times and updates the expiry
very frequently, the tokens are likely to expire in batch for the same key. This also means that there
is no way for a client to revoke a valid token or even check when will a token expire. To test out how
long the keys remain valid, we performed an empirical test. From our observation, TGTs appeared
to survive for at least a scale of several days which might be the reason for their internal name as
Long-Lived Tokens. OTTs were much shorter-lived and were generally expiring in about 12 hours.
3.5
On-Device Token Handling
privatecloudcomputed
/Thimble/privatecloudcomputed/TokenManagement/NSPTokenProvider.swift
PrivateAccessTokenFetcherProvider:
PrivateAccessTokenFetcherProviderProtocol
...
typealias Fetcher = 
PrivateAccessTokenFetcherProvider.Fetcher
...
func fetch(fetcher: Fetcher) async throws -> (...) {
... // do-catch logics and other async stuff
let (ltt, ott, salt) = try await 
fetcher.fetchLinkedTokenPair(with: .main)
return (ltt, ott, salt)
... // error handling
}
...
extension NSPPrivateAccessTokenFetcher: 
PrivateAccessTokenFetcherProtocol {}
91
...
93
...
153
...
161
162
...
174
...
198
NetworkServiceProxy.framework (Private Framework)
@implementation NSPPrivateAccessTokenFetcher : NSObject
- (void)fetchLinkedTokenPairWithQueue:... {
...
fetchPrivateAccessTokenPairWithFetcher(...);
}
- (void) fetchPrivateAccessTokenPairWithFetcher:... {
...
xpc_dictionary_set_int64(v15, "NSPServerCommandType", 51LL);
...
xpc_connection_send_message_with_reply(v14, ...);
// v14: XPC to com.apple.networkserviceproxy.fetch-token
}
networkserviceproxy (Daemon)
File System
/Users/<username>/Library/Keychains/login.keychain-db
// com.apple.networkserviceproxy.fetch-token’s entry point
// XPC with NSPServerCommandType 51LL eventually lands here:
NSMutableArray *__fastcall sub_1(__int64 a1){
...
v3 = +[NPUtilities copyDataFromKeychainWithIdentifier:accountName:](
&OBJC_CLASS___NPUtilities,
"copyDataFromKeychainWithIdentifier:accountName:",
CFSTR("com.apple.NetworkServiceProxy.ProxyToken"),
v2);
...
}
NetworkServiceProxy.framework (Private Framework)
@implementation NPUtilities : NSObject
+ (id)copyDataFromKeychainWithIdentifier:... {
...
isKindOfClass = SecItemCopyMatching(v11, &result);
...
} 
Security.framework (Public Framework)
// Public API for Keychain Access
OSStatus SecItemCopyMatching(CFDictionaryRef q, CFTypeRef * result); 
Reads the login keychain
❸XPC call
❶
❷
❹
❺
❻
Figure 5: Workflow of the token fetching of privatecloudcomputed
A key question here is where are the tokens stored on the device. Apple’s public documentation
does not offer any information on it. The source code published on GitHub, while including some
clues, also does not point to the on-device storage of the token. To find out how the tokens are
handled, we reverse engineered the Apple Intelligence subsystem on macOS and found that multiple
8

Table 1: Apple Intelligence access tokens and their fields
Token Name
Signed Portion
Signature
Validity
token_type
nonce
challenge_digest
token_key_id
authenticator
TGT
Static
Unknown & Unverified
Static
Key-Related
Key-Related
Days
OTT
Static
TGT + Random
Static
Key-Related
Key-Related
∼12 Hours
processes and frameworks are used. The workflow of retrieving the tokens is illustrated in Figure 5
and adding/updating the tokens works in a similar way.
The published source code of the main daemon of Apple Intelligence, privatecloudco
mputed, uses an aliased class Fetcher which is an extension of the NSPPrivateAccessTo
kenFetcher that implementes the fetchLinkedTokenPair function to fetch the token (❶).
NSPPrivateAccessTokenFetcher is implemented in Apple’s private framework NetworkServicePr
oxy. From this point, no further public information is available and we performed reverse engineering.
We found that the fetchLinkedTokenPair will call fetchPrivateAccessTokenPairWithFetcher
for token fetching in an asynchronous way (❷) using an XPC [3] call to initiate an inter-process
request to the system daemon networkserviceproxy with the endpoint of com.apple.networ
kserviceproxy.fetch-token (❸). According to Apple’s description on macOS’s man manual,
networkserviceproxy offers ‘Transparent network proxy for Apple system services’ and ‘The con-
trol plane of the NetworkServiceProxy framework runs inside of networkserviceproxy’. While not
documented publicly, the private framework and daemon of networkserviceproxy appears to be
related to the iCloud Private Relay feature [15]. Given the extensive similarity of the OHTTP
relay and certain authentication mechanisms, we believe that Apple added certain Apple Intelli-
gence authentication infrastructures into this private framework. In networkserviceproxy, the
com.apple.networkserviceproxy.fetch-token endpoint is dispatched using an XPC parame-
ter NSPServerCommandType which, for token fetching, is 51. The NetworkServiceProxy private
framework is again used for copying the token (❹) which would call the publicly available APIs
such as SecItemCopyMatching in the Security framework (❺). These APIs are used to store/fetch
credentials in the keychain infrastructure. Our investigation showed that the tokens for Apple
Intelligence are stored in the login keychain (❻). This will serve as the extraction point of the
tokens and the same APIs which are used in our attack will be introduced in later sections.
4
The Serpent Attack
With a comprehensive understanding of the authentication workflow, we discuss the vulnerability in
this authentication flow and present our attack, Serpent.
4.1
What’s Wrong with the Protocol?
Lack of Client-Side Token Protection. A problem with Apple Intelligence’s access tokens is that
the tokens are pretty much open to anyone on the device without any special privilege requirement.
In particular, the TGTs and OTTs are stored in the login keychain which is accessible with simply
the current user’s privilege. Besides, they are stored in plaintext in the keychain, meaning that
an attacker has a common entry to extract the token without the need to resort to debugging the
Apple Intelligence processes like privatecloudcomputed daemon. In summary, an attacker has a
simple and unified way to access the tokens with no privilege escalation required.
No Strong Bound to Hardware. Apple’s privacy design, instead of just making the tokens not
traceable to a specific device, completely detaches the tokens from the device. While we discovered
9

that the nonce of a TGT might be related to device information, neither is it verified nor device
information is sent to a validator (Token Granting Service, PCC gateways, PCC nodes). This means
that in no way can a token validator verify that a request comes from the hardware that the token
is issued to.
Long-Lived Token Can Be Leaked. The storage scheme and protection (if it exists at all) is the
same for TGTs and OTTs. Given their nature of single usage, leakage of OTTs might be less severe
and can be detected with PCC node’s currently disabled TGT validation. However, the leakage of
TGTs is significantly concerning. The danger of TGT leakage comes from two aspects. First, a
TGT’s expiration cycle is at a scale of days. Second, a TGT can be used to redeem OTTs as long as
the TGT is valid and the rate limit is not reached. Even if the rate limit was reached, after a cool
down period, we observed that a TGT can again be used to redeem OTTs. This gives an attacker a
very large window to access Apple Intelligence services using the victim’s actual allowance. In our
experiments, the daily rate limit resets after a cooldown period of roughly one day, while a TGT
remains valid for several days. This means that an attacker holding a stolen TGT can consume
the victim’s full daily quota, wait for the cooldown to pass, and then consume the quota again on
subsequent days—effectively exhausting the victim’s rate limit multiple times within a single TGT’s
lifetime.
No Revocation Available. As a remedy of last resort, token revocation may help stop a stolen
token to be continuously used by an unauthorised attacker to prevent further loss. However, we can
see that in Apple Intelligence platform, a user has no way to revoke or even refresh its access tokens.
This also means that if an attacker was able to obtain the TGT, it can keep on using the TGT with
no concern that the token may be invalidated by the user.
In summary, Apple Intelligence’s access tokens are poorly protected, insufficiently validated, and
can be stolen for long-term use by an attacker with no remedy available to the user.
4.2
Serpent: Attack Against Apple Intelligence’s access tokens
With the vulnerabilities in mind, we now introduce our attack, Serpent, which can allow a malicious
attacker to extract the tokens from a victim’s Apple device and use them on their own devices. The
attack contains two phases: An extraction phase on the victim’s device, and a disguise phase on an
attacker-controlled machine.
Threat Model. We consider the victim to be an ordinary owner of a Mac. Like most users,
the victim runs normal applications downloaded from the Internet at regular user privilege. In
Serpent, we assume the victim downloads a malware distributed by the attacker and runs it on its
device. When the malware attempts to read the access tokens from the keychain, macOS presents
an authentication prompt requiring the user to click ‘Allow’. We assume the victim grants this
permission, an assumption we consider realistic given the frequency of similar prompts in normal
macOS usage, the non-technical nature of the prompt text, and community advice that commonly
recommends clicking ‘Allow’ on such prompts [12, 13, 29]. In Section 5.2, we present a detailed
analysis to support this assumption. The attacker sets up a remote server waiting for the malicious
logic to send back the access tokens. If the access tokens were sent back and were usable for Apple
Intelligence services, the attack is considered as successful.
Extraction Phase. In the extraction phase, the victim runs an app obtained from the Internet
that contains the attacker’s malicious logic. This logic is very simple and can be done either
programmatically or via a simple shell script. When done programmatically, the app can simply call
keychain API SecItemCopyMatching with the token’s information. If the attacker chooses to use a
shell script, the /usr/bin/security can also be used with the same account names and service
10

names to fetch the tokens. The result from this step is a property list format (also known as a
plist). The actual token is encoded as Base64 in the plist at the path of $objects/NS.data.
The rest of the plist contains simple metadata that is not useful to an attacker. When retrieving
the tokens from the keychain, it may require a user authentication if the app was never authorised
to access the keychain. This authentication does not need root privilege and is common for any app
that uses the keychain. Once the tokens are extracted, the malicious logic can now send them to
the attacker in a remote place.
Disguise Phase. In the disguise phase, the attacker will use the tokens obtained from the victim
to disguise itself as the victim. This step is surprisingly simple. On the attacker’s Mac, the attacker
can overwrite the tokens of its own with the victim’s tokens. If no such tokens exist yet, the attacker
can create these keychain entries with the same account and service names and with the tokens
in the same plist format as the keychain item’s password payload. Now, whenever the attacker’s
Mac issues a request to the Apple Intelligence services, it will use the tokens of the victim. When
the fetched OTTs are exhausted, the TGT can also be used to fetch a new batch of OTTs as if the
fetch request was initiated by the victim.
5
Security Analysis
In this section, we systematically discuss and analyse the Serpent attack. In particular, we discuss
and evaluate the effectiveness of the attack, the victim experience during and after the attack,
the implications of this attack, and the possibilities for other abuses enabled by the attack. We
performed our empirical experiments on the same Mac mini on macOS 26.0 (25A353).
5.1
Effectiveness of Serpent
We evaluated the effectiveness of Serpent in three ways: First, we perform traffic analysis for
theoretical feasibility; Next, we use valid tokens to revive a banned Mac for a practical unauthorised
access; And finally, we present a DoS attack to demonstrate that the usage was counted towards
the victim.
Nominal Owner of Request. The very first thing we need to confirm is that after the successful
import of the victim’s tokens, the attacker is indeed using the victim’s token instead of still using
its own. To test it, we intercepted the requests sent by the privatecloudcomputed after importing
the victim’s tokens. We observed from the traffic that the TGT and OTTs included in the requests
were indeed from the victim. This proved that the nominal owner of the request is the victim.
Reviving Ineligible Macs. To demonstrate a concrete attack and to further verify that no other
ownership information was used in the Apple Intelligence’s authentication flow, we performed the
experiment of reviving an ineligible Mac owned by the attacker.
To do this, we first sent a huge prompt with a size of millions of prompt tokens to exhaust
the allowance of the attacker’s Mac. This will essentially cause the Mac to be banned from Apple
Intelligence services temporarily for at least a day. We then deleted the TGT and repeatedly fetched
new TGTs until PCC Identity Service also banned the Mac. This circumstance represents an abuse
scenario of Apple Intelligence service by sending out a massive amount of requests. Now, the Mac
was banned from the entire two stages of Apple Intelligence’s authentication flow and was ineligible
to use Apple Intelligence services. Next, we imported the access tokens obtained from the victim’s
device. After this, we found out that the attacker’s Mac was now able to use the TGT and OTTs
without a problem to access Apple Intelligence services. The TGT was also fully usable to fetch
new OTTs. This proved that the authentication to Apple Intelligence services is entirely based on
11

the access tokens of TGT and OTTs and our attack holds a very strong effectiveness in disguising
the attacker to use the victim’s Apple Intelligence allowance.
DoS Attack Against a Victim. To prove that usages of the attacker using the stolen tokens
are indeed counted towards the victim’s, we also present a Denial-of-Service (DoS) attack against
a victim user. In this case, the attacker will use up all the allowance of the victim by constantly
redeeming for OTTs, essentially burning the tokens out. Our experiments showed that after the
attacker used up the allowance of the TGT on the attacker’s Mac, the victim’s Mac also displayed a
warning suggesting that ‘Apple Intelligence is currently not available’ and stopped, meaning that
the usages were indeed counted towards the victim’s allowance. As in our observations discussed in
Section 3.2, Apple has rate limits for Apple Intelligence service usage using their ‘Fraud Detection
Service’ mechanism by controlling how many OTTs can be redeemed from a TGT. This means that
the attacker does not even have to actually use the OTT for the DoS attack. All it has to do is to
constantly redeem for OTTs using the TGT and drop them.
5.2
Victim Awareness
A key question to the Serpent attack is how it would visibly impact the victim during and after
the attack.
During the Attack. Since the attack extracts the tokens from the keychain, the victim has to
authorise the access. We consider three ways to achieve keychain access:
• Just Ask in Plain. The victim will be prompted by the keychain subsystem of macOS to
authenticate for the keychain item. The prompt shows the app’s name and the service name of
the TGT or OTT. Note that app’s name can be customised by the developer. We believe that
for an ordinary consumer, the prompt on the window would be difficult to understand and a
consumer would seek help from the Internet. From discussions of Apple’s own community, for a
similar prompt, the general suggestion to handle this window is to type in the login password and
hit the Allow button [12,13]. From other Internet forums, there are even suggestions to hit the
Always Allow button [29]. In conclusion, we believe that there is a high chance of a victim to
allow the malicious logic to access the tokens.
• Fake an Authentication Prompt. If the attacker would not want to display the default
keychain prompt that may expose the attacker’s intention, it can use a fake authentication prompt
that appears to be innocent to obtain the victim’s keychain password and then use tools with
headless modes like /usr/bin/security to gain access to the tokens. This kind of attack has
been observed in the wild in malware such as The Atomic macOS Stealer (AMOS) [48].
• Combine with a keychain Bypass Attack. In this case, the attack is essentially transparent to
the victim with no victim awareness at all. For example, attacks such as CVE-2017-7150 [40] can
bypass the authentication window, granting the malicious logics access to the tokens completely
in the background without victim knowledge.
Once the attacker is authorised to access the tokens from the keychain, there will be no obvious
or visible impact to the victim any more since all the attacker needs to do is to send the tokens
back to the attacker via network.
After the Attack. After the attacker gets the access tokens, it can use it completely without
the knowledge of the victim. If the attacker uses the tokens with some control by not completely
depleting the allowance, the victim might not even notice any difference as long as the total requests
of it combined with those issued by the attacker do not exceed the allowance. However, since the
attacker is not traceable on the victim’s side, if the attacker uses up the entire allowance the victim
has, all the victim will find out is that it cannot use Apple Intelligence services any more. As
12

presented in Section 5.1, there is no indication that the allowance has been exhausted but instead a
warning saying ‘Apple Intelligence is currently not available’. For an ordinary consumer, this looks
more like a service interruption rather than that it has been attacked. Therefore, after the attack,
the victim might experience usage difficulties or DoS symptoms but would not be aware that it has
been attacked.
5.3
Implications of Serpent
The implications of the Serpent attack can be wide-spread given how many Apple devices are
used in real life. Here, we introduce three main implications of Serpent:
• No Privilege Escalation Required. In this case, the attacker must first achieve code execution
on the victim’s machine (e.g., through a malware). The entire token extraction operates at normal
user privilege. The Serpent attack requires only normal user privilege, meaning that an attacker
does not need to seek a complex attack chain with privilege escalation. As we have discussed in
Section 5.2, the keychain authentication prompt can be addressed through social engineering with
a high chance that the victim would authenticate.
• Easy to Scale. The methodology of Serpent is extremely easy to scale due to the unified
attack surface of Apple devices. An attacker can easily insert the simple malicious logic in the
apps they distributed to collect these access tokens from Mac devices around the world to form
a token pool. The use of the tokens are also very easy to scale. An attacker can simply build
a farm of the most affordable Mac minis to run requests 24/7. For any Mac that exhausted its
token’s allowance, that Mac can just pick up a new token from the token pool and immediately
get back online.
• Hard to Trace. The end user’s information (e.g., IP addresses, hardware identifiers) are hidden
from Apple Intelligence services by design. This means that even if an abuse has been identified,
there is no possible way to know any information about the attacker on the Apple side. On the
client side, while the token pool server’s entry point may be exposed, such entry point can also be
hidden through proxies to completely hide the attacker from anyone.
6
Countermeasures
In this section, we present countermeasures we designed against the Serpent attack, one of which
has been deployed by Apple. Due to the complex and non-standard nature of Apple Intelligence’s
authentication and authorisation flow, a complete defence would inevitably need heavy changes to
the protocol. We first offer two mitigations that, while they cannot completely fix the vulnerability,
can make Serpent significantly more difficult while requiring minimal changes to existing protocols.
We then offer three complete defence methods that fix the fundamental flaw of Apple Intelligence’s
authentication flow at a cost of heavy modification to the flow and the software stack.
6.1
De-privilege Tokens from Users
A critical reason that the Serpent attack works is because the access tokens are accessible to
a regular user at normal user privileges. Therefore, the first possible mitigation is to prevent
Serpent through the token storage access control. The current implementation stores them in the
login keychain, allowing a user to easily create, read, update and delete all keychain entries which
unfortunately include the tokens used by Apple Intelligence services. An attacker in this case can
easily query the entry for extraction and add/update the entry on its own machine for unauthorised
access.
13

Figure 6: TGT now saves to the iCloud keychain on macOS 26.2 after Apple deployed
the mitigation with access group set to ‘apple’.
A relatively quick and easy mitigation to this problem is to simply de-privilege a regular user
from accessing the tokens. To do that, a possible solution is to have a dedicated account for the
Apple Intelligence’s client-side services. For example, a pcc account can be created to run the
privatecloudcomputed daemon. The access tokens for users can be stored in this pcc account’s
keychain so that they are never available directly to a user. The benefit of this mitigation is that it
requires almost no modification to the authentication protocol itself, with the only effort required
to be a new system user. The downside is, however, that this is bypassable with root privilege and
therefore is only a mitigation and not a fundamental fix. While being more difficult, a sudo prompt
can be faked or misleading in a similar fashion as discussed in Section 5.2.
Mitigation Adopted by Apple. We offered this insight to Apple along with others. After Apple
claimed they have deployed a mitigation for Serpent in macOS 26.2 security update, we analysed
their changes and found out that they likely have followed this idea but using another approach.
Instead of separating a local user, Apple moved the tokens from the user’s login keychain to the
iCloud keychain with access group set to ‘apple’ as shown in Figure 6. Any applications or even
CLI binaries trying to access the iCloud keychain must have a restricted entitlement designating
matching keychain-access-groups identifiers [2], which is enforced by AMFI [27] in the kernel.
These restricted entitlements must be approved and signed by Apple for a special provisioning
profile [1]. This means that one would need to bypass this entitlement check if using the keychain
APIs, making it more difficult. However, this mitigation is not a solid fix and may still be vulnerable
to other methods. For example, [27] offers a kernel extension to selectively bypass the restricted
entitlement check. Furthermore, automated memory debugging and traffic analysis can still reveal
the tokens used in Apple Intelligence. We have reported this to Apple and received its confirmation.
Apple is currently working on new patches for this issue.
14

6.2
Reducing TGT Signing Key Lifetime
An intuitive server-side mitigation that Apple could employ without any client-side changes is to
reduce the lifetime of the keys used to sign TGTs. As discussed in Section 3.4, tokens expire when
their signing key expires, and our experiments showed that TGTs remain valid for several days. By
rotating TGT signing keys more frequently, for example, from a lifetime of days to hours, Apple
could significantly shrink the window during which stolen TGTs remain usable. Although this would
not eliminate the attack, the attacker’s ability to exhaust the victim’s rate limit across multiple days
would be limited. The trade-off is increased load on the PCC Identity Service, as devices would need
to re-authenticate and obtain new TGTs more frequently. However, since TGT issuance is already
a lightweight operation relative to inference, this overhead may be acceptable. This mitigation is
complementary to the other countermeasures discussed below.
6.3
No Plaintext Retrievable Storage
While keychain is an encrypted database, its APIs allow plaintext retrieval of the stored secrets
including the access tokens for Apple Intelligence. Our second proposed mitigation aims to make
it significantly more difficult to steal the tokens by not storing retrievable plaintext of the tokens.
The main idea is: The only moment the tokens are in their plaintext form should be in the memory
of the PCC daemon. There are two possible ways of achieving this:
• Encrypt Using Hardware Root-of-Trust. The tokens can be encrypted using hardware
root-of-trust such as the Secure Enclave Processor (SEP) [6] that is trusted, verifiable and isolated
from the rest of the OS. A new API can be implemented for SEP that would only decrypt a token
requested from the PCC daemon.
• Request New TGTs Every Time. Given that PCC daemon does not typically exit, an even
simpler solution is to request new TGTs whenever PCC daemon launches. This means that there
will never be any local storage of the tokens at all. There can be slightly increased traffic for the
PCC Identity Service.
In this way, since there is no local retrievable storage of the tokens in plaintext, an attacker must
be able to attach a debugger onto the PCC daemon to hunt for the tokens. With widely-used
and default-on security techniques like ASLR, the difficulty of automated harvesting tokens can be
significantly increased. The benefit of this approach is that it also requires little to no modification
to the protocol but only changes to the OS components. However, just like the previous approach,
it is a mitigation and an attacker, albeit difficult, can still extract the tokens.
7
Discussions
The Serpent attack assumes a threat model under which an attacker steals the Apple Intelligence
access tokens to use the services while counting the usage towards the victim.
However, the
vulnerability that enabled Serpent can be exploited for further abuses, and could be used directly
against Apple.
One of the interesting observations we found about Apple Intelligence is that none of the request
handling processes after the initial PCC Identity Service need, or at least, verify an Apple device.
Apple Intelligence services are designed to be used with interfaces (mostly GUI) designed by Apple.
These interfaces are generally limited with predefined features, and are designed to be used by a real
person instead of being a generic LLM service. Due to the authentication flow vulnerability used by
Serpent, we believe that it is possible to create a fully-automated compatible client that would work
15

on other platforms, such as Linux, that only needs the TGT (and optionally, OTTs) and provide low-
level customisations to the prompt of the requests with the open-source client-side code on GitHub
and other publicly available knowledge. Unlike the human-oriented interfaces of Apple Intelligence,
the client can provide an automated interface to use Apple Intelligence services as a generic LLM ser-
vice which could lead to a significantly higher amount of requests than that from an ordinary user since
an automated client can easily use up all the rate limit in a short amount of time. Even worse, this
makes reselling the Apple Intelligence services as a generic LLM service possible and likely profitable,
even at the cost of an entry-level device with Apple Intelligence capabilities such as the Mac mini. In
this case, an attacker may even purchase these devices out of its own pocket for this level of abuse.
Ethics and Responsible Disclosure. We have responsibly disclosed the vulnerabilities to Apple
which confirmed the attack, awarded the bug bounty, assigned CVE to it, and released a software
update (macOS 26.2) with patches addressing the vulnerability. Our attack experiments were
performed exclusively on the devices we own. We did not exploit public-facing services Apple offers
nor did we interfere or compromise normal users.
8
Related Works
In this section, we discuss and compare research that are closely related to Serpent. Serpent is a
credential theft attack, in which existing works can be primarily categorised into two types: API
key leakage and cookie theft attacks. We provide a summarised comparison in Table 2 and discuss
them in details below.
8.1
API Key Leakage
API keys are app-specific credentials that grant an app to access certain services used by the app
(e.g., map for a food delivery app). The leakage of an API key means an attacker can use the
key for its own interest while making the usage billed towards the victim app. Existing works
have identified many possible leakage paths of these API keys. Works like [41, 43, 45, 46] used
active methods including traffic analysis and reverse engineering to obtain the API keys that are
inadequately protected across different platforms. Other works like [23,32,35,42] used a passive
approach that scans for leaked API keys in opensource projects on platforms like GitHub. Serpent
bears fundamental differences from these works in terms of both our approach and the attack’s
consequences.
First, Apple Intelligence’s tokens are device and user specific, meaning that the victim, instead
of being a supposed-to-be professional developer [47], is likely a non-technical end user. This means
that the victim of Serpent should not be considered to be responsible for or even capable of
properly protecting the tokens.
Second, awareness wise, Serpent is significantly more stealthy. With proper usage alerts setup, a
developer can quickly be aware of a potential API key leakage to take actions correspondingly [24,36].
Table 2: Comparison of Serpent with other attacks
Attack
Victim
Victim Awareness
Valid Length
Detection
Technique
Remedy
Serpent
End User
Low
Long (TGT)
None
Extraction
None
API Key Leakage
Active
Developer
High
Long
Usage
Analysis
Revocation
Passive
Developer
High
Long
Usage
Scan
Revocation
Cookie Theft
End User
High
Varies
Geo/Usage
Varies
Logout
16

However, as discussed in Section 5.2, the victim of Serpent is almost impossible to tell if it is under
attack. Even after the quota is used up, the seemingly service outage reveals no sign of Serpent.
Third, instead of a single global secret on an app that the attacker can analyse locally pretending
as a regular user [47], Serpent is an attack that harvests tokens from devices owned by non-specific
victim users and could cause wide-spread issues.
Finally, API keys can generally be revoked by developers in case of leakage to prevent further
loss [18] but not for Apple Intelligence. The victim of Serpent has no effective remedy available
once the tokens are leaked, even if the victim becomes aware of potential leakages of its tokens.
The only thing a victim can do is to wait until the long-term TGT gets expired.
8.2
Cookie Theft Attack
Cookie theft attacks are also related to Serpent. Cookies are credentials issued by a web service to
an authenticated user to access certain services. Similarly to API key leakage, cookie theft attacks
allow an attacker to access services but this time, with usages counted towards the victim user
instead of an app. Given the nature of the standard yet insecure usage of cookies, many attacks
have been introduced with different mechanisms such as XSS and Cross Site Request Forgery [9,34],
session hijacking [19], security policy forgery [21,39], DNS hijacking [20] and many more. However,
when comparing with cookie theft attacks, while both targeting end users, Serpent also differs
significantly.
Just like API key leakage, cookie theft can be detected both by the platform and the user
relatively easily since cookies can leak information such as geolocation of IP address [33] and usage
pattern [8]. When a potential leakage is detected, the victim can be notified for awareness. However,
Apple Intelligence’s authentication scheme is anonymous by design and has multiple stages to
prevent revealing geolocations and linking usage to a specific user, meaning that there is no practical
way to detect such leakage for user awareness.
Remedy wise, similar to API keys, most services offer a ‘sign out everywhere’ feature that
essentially invalidates all cookies previously issued [44] when the user feels that its cookies may have
been leaked. However, for Apple Intelligence, the fact that no revocation is available means that
the victim will have no remedy once the tokens are stolen.
9
Conclusion
We have presented Serpent, the first practical attack against the access tokens of Apple Intelligence.
Our study systematically investigated the authentication and authorisation flow of Apple Intelligence
and discovered its vulnerabilities that could allow an attacker to easily extract the access tokens
from a victim and use the service while counting the usage towards the victim. Serpent highlighted
that access tokens need to be strongly bound to the device to ensure that they are only usable by
the rightful user.
17