SDNGuardStack: An Explainable Ensemble Learning 
Framework for High-Accuracy Intrusion Detection in 
Software-Defined Networks 
 
Ashikuzzaman 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Barishal 
Barishal, Bangladesh 
ashikuzzaman.cse7.bu@gmail.com 
Md. Saifuzzaman Abhi 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Barishal 
Barishal, Bangladesh 
msaifuzzaman20.cse@bu.ac.bd 
Mahabubur Rahman 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Scholars 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
rahmanmahabubur771@gmail.com 
Dr. Md. Manjur Ahmed* 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Barishal 
Barishal, Bangladesh 
mmahmed@bu.ac.bd 
*Corresponding Author 
Md. Mehedi Hasan 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Barishal 
Barishal, Bangladesh 
mmehedi20.cse@bu.ac.bd 
Md. Ahsan Arif 
Dept. of CSE 
University of Scholars 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
ahsan@ius.edu.bd 
 
 
Abstract—Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is another technology 
that has been developing in the last few years as a relevant technique 
to improve network programmability and administration. Nonetheless, 
its centralized design presents a major security issue, which requires 
effective intrusion detection systems. The SDN-specific machine learning-
based intrusion detection system described in this paper is innovative 
because it is trained and tested on the InSDN dataset which models attack 
scenarios and realistic traffic patterns in SDN. Our approach incorporates 
a comprehensive preprocessing pipeline, feature selection via Mutual 
Information, and a novel ensemble learning model, SDNGuardStack, 
which combines multiple base learners to enhance detection accuracy 
and efficiency. In addition, we include explainable AI methods, including 
SHAP to add transparency to model predictions, which helps security 
analysts respond to incidents. The experiments prove that SDNGuard-
Stack has an accuracy rate of 99.98% and a Cohen Kappa of 0.9998, 
surpassing other models, and at the same time being interpretable and 
practically executable. It is interesting to see such features like Flow ID, 
Bwd Header Len, and Src Port as the most important factors in the 
model predictions. The work is a step towards closing the gap between 
performance intrusion detection and realistic deployment in SDN, which 
will lead to the creation of secure and resilient network infrastructures. 
Index Terms—Software Defined Networking (SDN), Intrusion Detec-
tion System (IDS), SHAP, Explainable AI (XAI), Ensemble Learning, 
Feature Selection, Mutual Information, Network Security. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is a relatively young tech-
nology that, within recent years, became one of the foundations of 
programmable networks and traffic control with centralized man-
agement [1], [2]. Since SDN will expand its use in enterprise and 
cloud networks, which is projected to increase to USD 70 billion 
by 2030, it also creates additional avenues of attack because of its 
logically centralized design. As the control hub, the SDN controller 
introduces a serious point of vulnerability [3]. Such compromise has 
the potential to interfere with or divert behavior on a network-wide 
basis. Conventional intrusion detection systems (IDS), many of which 
are signature-based, do not scale to SDN environments because they 
are static and cannot be used to identify threats that are dynamic 
[4]. Machine learning (ML) based approaches represent an attractive 
alternative as they can identify traffic patterns and extrapolate to new 
attacks [5]–[9]. Nevertheless, most current SDN-oriented ML 
approaches suffer significant drawbacks: high misclassification 
rate, lack of explainability and high computational costs that make 
real-time deployment impractical [10] . Recent benchmark datasets 
(NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15) do not reflect well the 
current SDN traffic behavior. The InSDN dataset overcomes such 
a shortcoming by offering realistic, SDN-specific traffic flows and 
current attack classes. It allows the researchers to investigate ML-
based detection under a more realistic setting. The proposed work 
is an ML-based intrusion detection system specifically designed to 
work with SDN, with the InSDN dataset used to give the work a more 
real-world application. The methodology does not only consider the 
accuracy of detection, but it is also efficient and explainable, which 
guarantees its practical application to real-time SDN systems. 
The key contributions of this work are: 
• An in-depth preprocessing pipeline including noise filtering, 
feature selection, and class balancing is implemented to improve 
data quality and model generalizability. 
• Multiple ML models are benchmarked and optimized to enhance 
intrusion detection accuracy across diverse attack categories. 
• The proposed architecture minimizes computational complexity 
to 
ensure 
compatibility 
with 
SDN 
controller 
runtime 
environments. 
• A novel ensemble learning model is introduced, combining base 
learners to achieve higher robustness and predictive stability. 
• Explainable AI techniques such as SHAP and LIME are 
integrated, offering transparency into model decisions and 
aiding security analysts in incident response. 
All these contributions are meant to close the gap between high-
performance intrusion detection and realistic SDN deployment. 
The remainder of the document is organized as follows: Section 2 
contains the relevant work on SDN-based intrusion detection with 
ML is reviewed. Section 3 provides information on the dataset, 
preprocessing steps and overall methods. Section 4 discusses 
evaluation metrics and experimental results. Section 5 summarizes 
the paper and suggests topics of future research. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Machine learning solutions to intrusion detection in SDNs have 
been varied with high accuracy as the goal. However, it is challenging 

to find a compromise between detection performance, interpretability 
and computational efficiency. In this section, the literature that 
considers these aspects will be reviewed. 
Ataa et al. [11] proposed a CNN-LSTM and Transformer-based 
hybrid intrusion detection framework for the dataset InSDN. Strong 
detection performance was attained by their model, with the Trans-
former component attaining 99.02% accuracy in binary classification 
tasks. Although the method demonstrated high generalization across 
attack types, it lacked interpretability features such as SHAP or 
LIME, which are essential for understanding decision rationale in 
security contexts. Additionally, Transformer models incur heavy 
computational overhead, making them unsuitable for real-time SDN 
deployment in latency-sensitive environments. Ibrahim et al. [12] 
developed a classical machine learning-based approach using Ran-
dom Forest and KNN classifiers along with SMOTE to handle class 
imbalance. Their pipeline surpassed 99% accuracy on the InSDN 
dataset and performed well across diverse attack classes. However, 
the absence of interpretability mechanisms and reliance on manual 
preprocessing and feature engineering introduce operational 
complexity. These factors, coupled with limited model transparency, 
hinder its effectiveness in dynamic and real-time SDN environments. 
Shariff et al. [13] proposed a deep learning framework leveraging 
LSTM networks optimized with Bayesian tuning. Their system 
achieved up to 99.6% accuracy in detecting DDoS attacks, benefiting 
from LSTM’s ability to capture sequential patterns in traffic. Despite 
its accuracy, the model lacks explainable AI (XAI) tools and requires 
computationally intensive Bayesian optimization, limiting its 
suitability for time-critical SDN controller operations. Mills et al. 
[14] introduced a hybrid intrusion detection and prevention 
framework utilizing ensemble stacking of multiple supervised 
classifiers. This approach outperformed individual models in 
accuracy, precision, and recall. However, it significantly increased 
model complexity, memory usage, and inference latency. The 
framework also omitted interpretability techniques, making it 
difficult for network administrators to trace prediction outcomes—
thereby reducing operational trust and regulatory compliance. Wang 
et al. [15] applied Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs) for 
anomaly detection in SDNs, achieving a precision of 98.15%. TCNs 
provided a lighter alternative to RNNs for modeling sequential data. 
However, the approach lacked algorithmic and visual interpretability 
features and required considerable computational resources during 
training and inference. These limitations diminish its feasibility in 
resource-constrained or latency-sensitive SDN environments. Xu et 
al. [16] proposed the ESWO-IDM model, which integrates the 
Spider Wasp Optimizer with K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) to enhance 
detection accuracy. The model achieved 98.83% accuracy, 
illustrating the benefit of metaheuristic-based feature selection. 
Nevertheless, both the optimizer and KNN lack interpretability, and 
KNN’s high inference time complexity reduces scalability. These 
drawbacks make the approach unsuitable for real-time SDN intrusion 
detection systems. Fotse et al. [17] introduced FedLAD, a federated 
learning-based DDoS detection framework for large-scale SDNs. It 
attained approximately 98% accuracy while ensuring local data 
privacy across distributed nodes. Despite its privacy advantages, 
FedLAD suffers from communication and synchronization overhead 
that can increase latency. Furthermore, the absence of global 
interpretability tools limits transparency and hampers its adoption in 
real-time, operational SDN environments. 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
In this section, we describe the methodology of this research in 
detail. Figure 1 indicates the full pipeline of the proposed workflow, 
starting with data acquisition, explanatory intrusion detection based 
on ensemble learning and model interpretation methods. 
 
Fig. 1: The proposed workflow for SDN Intrusion detection. 
 
 
 
A. Data Collection 
The work is conducted on the basis of the InSDN dataset, which 
is a realistic and SDN-specific intrusion detection dataset hosted on 
Kaggle [18], [19]. It consists of 343 889 traffic records, 83 features 
(79 numerical and 4 categorical (object)). The numerical features 
consist of different statistics of the flow level, including the number 
of packets, the byte rate, or the flow duration and the categorical 
features are the protocol types, IP addresses, or labels. 
The dataset consists of 8 different kinds of attacks as well as benign 
(normal) traffic, which covers a large variety of threats relevant to 
SDN environments. 
TABLE I: Attack Types in the InSDN Dataset 
 
Attack 
Description 
Count 
 
Probe 
Port/service scan 
98,129 
DDoS (1) 
Distributed DoS variant 1 
73,529 
Normal 
Benign SDN traffic 
68,424 
DoS 
Denial of Service 
53,616 
DDoS (2) 
Distributed DoS variant 2 
48,413 
BFA 
Brute-force attempts 
1,405 
Web-Attack 
Malicious HTTP requests 
192 
Botnet 
C&C infected traffic 
164 
U2R 
Privilege escalation 
17 

val 
val 
B. Preprocessing 
The InSDN dataset was preprocessed using various techniques 
in order to make it ready to be seen by machine learning algo-
rithms. The Timestamp feature was dropped because it did not 
have predictive value. Categorical variables such as Dst IP, Src 
IP, Flow ID, and Label were encoded with label encoding to 
change textual representation to numerical representation. This was 
to allow compatibility with standard ML algorithms. As there was 
high variance in numerical features, they were standardized by z-
score normalization such that each feature has zero mean and unit 
variance. These measures mitigated the effect of scale and advanced 
the rate of convergence as well as the general learning performance 
of the models. 
C. Significance of Features using One-Way ANOVA 
To ascertain feature relevance a One-Way ANOVA test was con-
ducted. The variables Tot Fwd Pkts and Subflow Fwd Pkts 
were identified as insignificant having p-value more than 0.05. These 
characteristics showed insignificant differences across the various 
types of attacks and were not considered in the subsequent analysis 
to enhance model effectiveness. 
D. Feature Selection 
To check the dependence between each feature and the 
target variable, Mutual Information (MI) was utilized. The 
mutual_info_classif 
scoring 
function 
along 
with 
SelectKBest was used to pick the top 15 features based 
on the MI scores. The features that are chosen have the greatest 
correlation with the categories of attacks and, therefore, enhance the 
interpretability of the model and decrease its dimensionality. 
The relative importance of the top 15 features is demonstrated in 
Table II, which indicates the MI scores of all features. 
TABLE II: Top 15 Features Selected by Mutual Information 
1) Dataset Balancing: Since there was clear class imbalance in 
the training set, hybrid sampling method was used. Oversampling and 
undersampling were done on the majority classes to 30,000 samples 
each and minority classes to 30,000 samples. This class weighted 
scheme provides equal representation to all classes (30,000 samples 
per class) reducing the bias and resulting in a significant increase in 
the model performance on the underrepresented attack types. 
F. Baseline Models 
A total of six popular machine learning models were trained 
to provide a baseline of performance of SDN intrusion detection. 
Decision Tree (DT) is a model with low complexity and interpretation 
which partitions data according to feature threshold. Extra Trees (ET) 
is a variant of Random Forest with random splits which tends to 
decrease variance. A feed-forward neural network called the Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) is capable of modeling intricate nonlinear 
interactions. Random Forest (RF) constructs a number of decision 
trees and averages their prediction to enhance precision and minimize 
overfitting. K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) uses the most common label 
of the nearest neighbors to classify the samples, thus it is intuitive, 
however it is computationally expensive on large scale data. Lastly, 
the eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) is an efficient and scalable 
boosting algorithm that has high predictive power and can regularize. 
These models have been chosen due to their variability in style and 
excellent performance in classification issues. 
1) SDNGuardStack: Proposed Ensemble Stacking Model: Ensem-
ble stacking model proposed in this research is aimed at combining 
several base learners to exploit the strengths of each learner and 
enhance the overall intrusion detection performance [20]. The base 
learners are Decision Tree (DT), Extra Trees (ET), and Multi-Layer 
Perceptron (MLP). The meta-learner receives the features of the 
predictions made by these models, which are independently learnt 
on the training data. The Light Gradient Boosting Machine (LGBM) 
classifier, which is effective in combining the predictions of the base 
models to produce the final prediction, is used to implement the 
meta-learner. The idea of this hierarchical approach is to achieve 
better detection performance bycovering a wide variety of decision 
boundaries and minimizing model bias. Pseudocode Algorithm 1 
sums up the training procedure of the suggested stacking ensemble. 
 
 
Algorithm 1 Stacking Ensemble for SDN Intrusion Detection 
 
 
Require: Training dataset D = {(x , y )}N 
i i i=1 
 
E. Dataset Splitting 
To balance model training and evaluation, the dataset was split 
80/20 between training and testing sets. The split distribution of the 
dataset is provided in Table III. 
TABLE III: Training and Testing Sample Counts per Class after 80- 
Require: Base learners: Decision Tree (DT), Extra Trees (ET), MLP 
Require: Meta learner: LightGBM (LGBM) 
0: Split dataset D into training set Dtrain and validation set Dval 
0: for each base learner m in {DT, ET, MLP} do 
0: 
Train m on Dtrain 
0: 
Generate predictions Pm on Dval 
0: end for 
20 Split 
0: Construct 
new 
dataset 
D′ 
using 
predictions 
{PDT , PET , PMLP } as features 
0: Train meta learner LGBM on D′ 
 
with true labels from Dval 
0: Output: Trained stacking ensemble model =0 
 
 
G. Explainable AI for Model Transparency 
SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) was applied to explain 
the model decisions measuring feature contributions [21], [22]. This 
approach gives appropriate answers on what characteristics are rele-
vant to predictions to enhance the transparency and confidence in 
Feature 
MI Score 
Feature 
MI Score 
Flow ID 
1.5689 
Bwd IAT Max 
1.0322 
Bwd Header Len 
1.2519 
Bwd Pkts/s 
1.0084 
Src IP 
1.2220 
Flow IAT Mean 
1.0030 
Dst Port 
1.1343 
Flow Pkts/s 
1.0009 
Dst IP 
1.0474 
Init Bwd Win Byts 0.9804 
Bwd IAT Mean 1.0464 
Flow Duration 
0.9464 
Bwd IAT Tot 
1.0376 
Src Port 
0.9438 
Flow IAT Max 
0.9424 
Class (Attack Type) 
Training Samples 
Testing Samples 
2 (Probe) 
97,524 
19,626 
5 (DDoS) 
78,537 
14,706 
4 (Normal) 
54,823 
13,685 
3 (DoS) 
42,809 
10,723 
0 (BFA) 
1,123 
281 
7 (Web-Attack) 
149 
38 
1 (BOTNET) 
132 
33 
6 (U2R) 
14 
3 

the intrusion detection system, which is crucial in SDN security 
applications. 
IV. DISCUSSION AND RESULTS 
This part provides the experimental outcomes and performance 
comparison of the proposed SDNGuardStack model with some base-
line classifiers. The models were evaluated with common classifica-
tion metrics, accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and Cohens Kappa 
along with computational cost measures, like training time. 
Table IV shows the comparison of the results of various machine 
learning models on training and testing data SDN intrusion detection. 
The capacities of all models to learn distinguishing features of the 
dataset are good, as they reach almost perfect accuracy, precision, 
recall, and F1-score on the training set. The proposed SDNGuard-
Stack model significantly outperforms the baseline classifiers on the 
testing set and obtains the highest scores on all metrics (accuracy, 
precision, recall, and F1-score at 0.9998). This shows that it can 
generalize and detect intrusions in unseen data better, a crucial 
property of SDN security solutions that have to be used in real 
time. Other models like Decision Tree, Extra Trees, and Random 
Forest also achieve high results, yet their evaluating measures are 
slightly lower than SDNGuardStack, which implies that the stacking 
ensemble structure is not pointless in terms of gaining performance 
benefit. All models have minimal variations between training and 
testing results indicating that overfitting is sufficiently avoided. In 
order to give a more detailed analysis, Table V below shows the 5-
fold cross-validation accuracy of the training data and Cohen Kappa 
scores of the testing data. These other measures provide additional 
information of the robustness, consistency and agreement of the 
models over and above accuracy and supports the soundness of the 
proposed SDNGuardStack in different network settings. 
The results in Table V indicate the 5-fold cross-validation run on 
the validation accuracy and Cohen Kappa for the different models. 
The performance of all models is very high, as validation accuracy 
and kappa statistics are nearly equal to 1.0, which means that the 
models have high predictive ability. The suggested SDNGuardStack 
model provides the most accurate outcomes with the highest vali-
dation accuracy of 1.0000 and the maximum Cohen kappa value of 
0.9998, indicating its overall capability to identify SDN intrusions 
most effectively. Other models such as Extra Trees, XGBoost, and 
Random Forest have also performed well but a little bit lower than 
SDNGuardStack. Such findings indicate the strength and efficiency 
of the SDNGuardStack model in precision and stability of intrusion 
detection in SDN networks; however, at the expense of greater 
computational expense during training as outlined in Table VI, which 
reports training times of the reviewed models. 
The training time of every assessed model is stated in Table 
VI. The classical machine learning models also offer the shortest 
training time: K-Nearest Neighbors (1.12 seconds), but tree-based 
models, such as Extra Trees and Random Forest require more time 
(approx. 30 seconds). The neural network structure of the Multi-Layer 
Perceptron makes it time consuming (54.58 seconds). Proposed model 
SDNGuardStack offers the longest training time (70.45 seconds) 
since it is more extensive and intricate in its structure to ensure 
better detection capabilities. Even though SDNGuardStack requires 
increased computation resources in training, its high accuracy and 
strong performances pay off in the game of secure and reliable SDN 
intrusion detection. 
The evaluation results of the proposed SDNGuardStack model 
are in Figure 2. The confusion matrix (top-left) indicates a great 
classification accuracy, especially on high frequency classes like Class 
2, 3, and 5 with few misclassifications overall. This is additionally 
confirmed by the Precision-Recall curve (top-right) where the AUC 
values are close to perfect on most classes (AUC 0.9997), but the 
AUC values on Class 6 is much lower at 0.7238, suggesting that 
this class is comparatively difficult to isolate - perhaps because of 
class imbalance or feature overlap. The learning curve (bottom-left) 
illustrates a stable performance when the size of training set grows, 
the validation accuracy is gradually growing and almost coincides 
with the training accuracy, indicating a good generalization and a low 
degree of overfitting. The ROC curve (bottom-right) further supports 
the high detection power of the model, where all classes have almost 
perfect AUCs, meaning high true positives rates and low false positive 
rates. All together, these numbers confirm the soundness, basically 
pointing to the generalizability, and high precision of the suggested 
SDNGuardStack in SDN intrusion detection contexts. 
A. Feature Impact Detection via SHAP in SDNGuardStack 
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) was used to assess feature 
importance in the multiple traffic classes to interpret the decisions 
made by the model. Overall contribution was found to be the highest 
in Flow ID, then Bwd Header Len, Src Port and Src IP 
(shown in Figure 3), which implies that these features have a great 
impact in differentiating benign and malicious SDN traffic. There 
was also some class-wise contributions such that Bwd Header 
Len contributed greatly to Classes 2 and 3 whereas Src IP 
contributed significantly to Class 5. Features such as Bwd IAT Max 
and Bwd IAT Mean have low SHAP values indicating they are not 
very relevant. The given analysis makes the suggested ensemble 
more interpretable because the globally and locally important features 
have been determined. 
 
Fig. 3: SHAP summary plot showing the mean absolute SHAP value 
for top contributing features across SDN traffic classes. 
 
B. Comparative Analysis with previous studies 
As can be seen in the comparative analysis in Table VII, some 
of the recent intrusion detection frameworks propose high accuracy 

TABLE IV: Performance Comparison of Models on Training and Testing Sets 
 
Model 
Training 
Testing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2: Comprehensive evaluation results of the SDNGuardStack model: confusion matrix (top-left), precision-recall curve (top-right), learning 
curve (bottom-left), and ROC curve (bottom-right). 
 
TABLE V: 5-Fold Cross-Validation: Validation Accuracy and Co-
hen’s Kappa 
 
Model 
Validation Accuracy 
Cohen’s Kappa 
 
 
Decision Tree 
0.9998 
0.9996 
Extra Trees 
0.9999 
0.9997 
K-Nearest Neighbors 
0.9997 
0.9992 
Multi-Layer Perceptron 
0.9996 
0.9991 
Random Forest 
0.9999 
0.9996 
XGBoost 
0.9999 
0.9997 
Proposed SDNGuardStack 
1.0000 
0.9998 
TABLE VI: Training Time of Different Models (in seconds) 
 
Model 
Training Time (s) 
Decision Tree 
2.85 
Extra Trees 
29.47 
Random Forest 
32.96 
K-Nearest Neighbors 
1.12 
Multi-Layer Perceptron 
54.58 
XGBoost 
17.58 
Proposed SDNGuardStack 
70.45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results greater than 99%, but none of them considers explainable 
AI (XAI) methods to improve the transparency of the models. Not 
only does the proposed SDNGuardStack framework achieve the 
best accuracy of 99.98%, but it also takes into consideration XAI 
techniques, which introduce essential interpretability usually lacking 
in the previous works. Such a combination of excellent perfor-
mance and explainability has made SDNGuardStack exceptionally 
well applicable in real-time secure and trustworthy Software-Defined 
Networking (SDN) operation, covering both detection performance 
and operational visibility. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this work, we propose SDNGuardStack, an effective machine 
learning-based intrusion detector system tailored to Software-Defined 
Networking (SDN) scenarios. Using InSDN dataset, the model dis- 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-score 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
F1-score 
Decision Tree [23] 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
Extra Trees [24] 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
K-Nearest Neighbors [25] 
0.9998 
0.9998 
0.9998 
0.9998 
0.9994 
0.9994 
0.9994 
0.9994 
Multi-Layer Perceptron [26] 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9993 
0.9993 
0.9993 
0.9993 
0.9993 
Random Forest [27] 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
0.9997 
XGBoost [28] 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9996 
0.9996 
0.9996 
0.9996 
Proposed SDNGuardStack 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
0.9998 
0.9998 
0.9998 
0.9998 

TABLE VII: Comparison of Intrusion Detection Studies: Model, 
Accuracy, and XAI Support 
 
Study 
Model 
Accuracy (%) 
XAI Support 
[11] 
CNN-LSTM 
99.02 
No 
[12] 
Random Forest 
>99 
No 
[13] 
LSTM 
99.60 
No 
[14] 
Stacking Classifiers 
>99 
No 
This Study 
SDNGuardStack 
99.98 
Yes 
 
plays a remarkable accuracy of 99.98% and a Cohen Kappa statistic 
of 0.9998, also identifying different attack scenarios effectively. The 
model can be improved with the explainable AI methods (SHAP and 
LIME), which increase the transparency and enable security analysts 
to see the contribution of features, with the most important features 
being Flow ID, Bwd Header Len and Src Port, reported as important 
predictors. The work has addressed the most important issues in SDN 
security, and also it offers a realistic solution that can be implemented 
in real time. 
In future work, the scaling of SDNGuardStack will be optimized, 
which will allow working with bigger datasets and in more intricate 
network settings. cutting-edge explainability techniques will also be 
discussed, to expand on clarifying model decisions further, getting 
the users to trust it more. Furthermore, incorporation of real-time 
data streams will enable adaptive learning, whereby the model can 
keep on enhancing its detection ability based on the changing threats. 
The work is done to secure and strengthen the SDN infrastructures 
to meet the emerging cyber threats, and assure their integrity and 
reliability in the dynamic network environment. This work is part of 
the current research to effectively secure SDN systems.