(Special Session)
This paper will be presented at IEEE VLSI Test Symposium (VTS) 2026.
From Language to Logic: Bridging LLMs & Formal
Representations for RTL Assertion Generation
Nowfel Mashnoor, Hadi Kamali, Kimia Azar
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE), University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
{nowfel, kamali, azar}@ucf.edu
Abstract—SystemVerilog Assertions (SVA) are essential for
formal verification of digital hardware, yet their manual creation
demands significant expertise in both the design under verifica-
tion and temporal logic. Recent studies have explored using large
language models (LLMs) to automate SVA generation, but exist-
ing approaches suffer from incorrect signal references, missing
timing constraints, and lack of formal correctness guarantees.
This paper presents ProofLoop, a tool-augmented ReAct agent
that generates SVA from natural-language specifications using a
solver-in-the-loop approach. The agent operates in two phases:
Phase A autonomously gathers design context by invoking EDA
and formal tools, including semantic search over an AST-indexed
vector database and JasperGold structural queries, while Phase B
generates SVA and iteratively refines it using JasperGold formal
proof feedback over up to fixed (here 3) verification rounds. We
evaluate ProofLoop on FVEval Design2SVA design benchmarks
and demonstrate that this framework can achieve 93.7% syn-
tax correctness and 82.0% functional correctness. An ablation
study confirms that each component, i.e., retrieval-augmented
generation (RAG), JasperGold tools, and the verification loop
contributes significantly (and orthogonally).
Index Terms—SystemVerilog Assertions, Formal Verification,
LLM, ReAct Agent, Solver-in-the-Loop, RAG.
I. INTRODUCTION
Assertion-based verification (ABV) is a cornerstone of modern
hardware verification, enabling engineers to express design
intent as SystemVerilog Assertions (SVA) that can be formally
proven or monitored during simulation [1]–[3]. However,
writing quality SVA remains computation- and labor-intensive
that requires deep understanding of both register-transfer level
(RTL) semantics and temporal logic [4]. Prior automated
approaches based on data mining [5]–[7] or template matching
[8], [9] have shown promise but remain limited in expressive-
ness and require design-specific configuration. As hardware
complexity continues to grow, particularly at system-on-chip
(SoC) scale, the cost of non-automated assertion authoring has
become a bottleneck in verification.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise in au-
tomating SVA generation [10]–[12], building on their success
in RTL code generation [13]–[18] and verification [19], [20].
However, directly prompting an LLM with raw RTL and a
specification often produces assertions with incorrect signal
names, wrong clock/reset assumptions, and mismatched tem-
poral sequences (w.r.t. actual hardware behavior) [21], [22].
These errors persist because LLMs lack access to the structural
metadata that verification engineers rely on, e.g., flip-flop
clocking, reset values, signal fanin/fanout relationships, and
FSM state encodings. While retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) [23] has improved LLM grounding in other domains,
and recent work has applied it to RTL code generation [24], its
potential for assertion generation, particularly when combined
with formal-tool structural queries remains largely unexplored.
To address these challenges, we present ProofLoop, a
tool-augmented ReAct agent for automated SVA generation
that integrates Cadence JasperGold as a solver-in-the-loop.
This agentic approach allows the model to dynamically decide
what information it needs, rather than following a fixed
pipeline. The key contributions are:
(1) Agentic context synthesis. We propose a ReAct-based
agent that autonomously gathers verification-relevant con-
text via semantic retrieval over an AST-indexed RTL rep-
resentation and structural queries to a formal tool.
(2) Solver-in-the-loop refinement. We introduce an iterative
verification loop that leverages formal proof feedback to
correct generated assertions, enabling targeted repair of
syntax errors, signal mismatches, and inconsistencies.
(3) Scalable assertion generation. We demonstrate that tool-
augmented context and iterative refinement significantly
improve both syntactic and functional correctness, with
robustness that scales to complex, multi-module designs.
(4) Comprehensive empirical study. We evaluate on the FVE-
val benchmark [25] and present ablation analyses that quan-
tify the impact of retrieval, structural analysis, and verifi-
cation feedback, highlighting the role of tool augmentation
in bridging natural language and formal specifications.
II. RELATED WORK
Traditional approaches to automated assertion generation in-
clude GoldMine [5], which uses data mining over simulation
traces; HARM [6], a hint-based assertion miner; and AutoSVA
[8], which generates formal testbenches from interface anno-
tations. While effective for specific patterns, these methods do
not generalize from natural-language specifications.
Table I summarizes key differences among recent LLM-
based SVA generation approaches. ChIRAAG [26] uses GPT-
4 with simulation log feedback. AssertLLM [27] introduces a
three-phase multi-LLM pipeline, but operates without formal
feedback. SANGAM [28] applies Monte Carlo Tree Self-
Refine (MCTSr) with JasperGold syntax checking in the
search loop; however, its MCTSr-based search is computa-
tionally expensive and does not leverage JG metadata for
context enrichment. Saarthi [29] proposes an agentic multi-
agent system with formal proof analysis but lacks a large-
arXiv:2604.23100v1 [cs.CR] 25 Apr 2026

TABLE I: Comparison of LLM-Based SVA Generation Approaches.
Method
RAG JG Meta. Agentic Tools Solver Loop Bench. Eval.
ChIRAAG [26]
✗
✗
✗
Sim.
✗
AssertLLM [27]
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
SANGAM [28]
✓
✗
✗
JG
✗
Saarthi [29]
✗
✗
✓
FV
✗
AssertionForge [30]
KG
✗
✗
✗
✗
SVAgent [31]
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
ChatSVA [32]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
ProofLoop (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
JG
✓
scale benchmark evaluation. AssertionForge [30] constructs
a knowledge graph for multi-resolution context synthesis but
does not include iterative formal refinement. SVAgent [31]
uses fine-grained prompting for security-oriented assertions
without RAG or iterative formal refinement. ChatSVA [32]
combines task-specific fine-tuned LLMs with data augmenta-
tion, complementing our tool-augmented approach. Menon et
al. [33] contribute a curated SVA dataset that supports fine-
tuning-based methods. FVEval [25] establishes the benchmark
and evaluation methodology we adopt. RTLFixer [34] and
Blocklove et al. [35] demonstrate that iterative EDA tool
feedback can correct LLM-generated RTL, a concept we
extend to assertion generation. Hassan et al. [36] combine
LLM-guided formal verification with mutation testing, high-
lighting the synergy between LLMs and formal tools. As
shown in Table I, ProofLoop differs from prior work in
two key ways: (i) the agent autonomously decides which
tools to invoke through a reasoning loop, dynamically adapt-
ing its information-gathering strategy per specification; and
(ii) JasperGold is integrated both for structural queries during
context gathering (signal dependency and register analysis)
and for formal proof during iterative verification.
III. PROPOSED METHOD: PROOFLOOP
A. Overview
Fig. 1 shows the ProofLoop framework. Given an RTL
design and a natural-language assertion specification, the
system operates in 3 stages: (1) AST indexing builds a
semantic knowledge base from the RTL, (2) a ReAct agent
gathers design context via tool calls in Phase A, and (3) the
agent generates SVA, followed by iteratively refining it using
JasperGold formal verification in Phase B (see Alg. 1).
B. AST Indexing and Knowledge Base
The RTL design is parsed using a SystemVerilog compiler [37]
to produce an verifiable AST. The AST is decomposed into
four semantic chunk types:
1) Module Interface: ports, parameters, and localparams.
2) Always Block: capturing sequential/combinational logic.
3) Instance: sub-module instantiations with port connections.
4) Assign: continuous assignment groups.
Each chunk is embedded using an embedding model and
stored in a vector database, creating a per-design knowledge
base that supports semantic similarity search. This modular
decomposition ensures that the LLM context window is pop-
ulated only with the most relevant design fragments rather
than the entire RTL, which is critical for multi-module designs
where the full source can exceed context limits.
C. Phase A: Context Gathering
The tool autonomously gathers design context through an
interleaved Thought →Action →Observation loop for up
to 6 rounds. The system has access to two categories of tools:
(1) Retrieval tools provide lightweight access to the vector
database. They enable semantic search over the AST-indexed
chunks, module interface queries (ports, parameters), hierarchy
traversal across the dependency tree, parameter/localparam
resolution, and signal-specific always-block retrieval.
Structural analysis tools interface with JasperGold to
extract hardware-level metadata that cannot be inferred from
RTL text alone. These include signal fan-in and fan-out cone
extraction, which reveals datapath dependencies, and flip-flop
property inspection, which reports clock domains, reset be-
havior, and data-input connections. The system autonomously
decides which tools to call based on the specification. This
approach skips extra queries for simple cases while allowing
deeper exploration for complex designs.
D. Phase B: SVA Generation and Verification Loop
After context gathering, the agent generates candidate SVA
conditioned on the retrieved design context and the natural-
language specification. The generated assertions are embedded
into the RTL and passed to JasperGold for bounded formal
AST Indexing & 
Knowledge Base Preprocessing
AST Parser
AST Parser
AST Parser
Module Interface
(ports, parameters)
Module Interface
(ports, parameters)
Module Interface
(ports, parameters)
Chunk Types Extracted
Input Data 
Collection
RTL Desing
(SV)
RTL Desing
(SV)
Spec
Spec
Input Data 
Collection
RTL Desing
(SV)
Spec
Embedding
Embedding
Embedding
Embedding
Always Block
(seq/comb logic)
Always Block
(seq/comb logic)
Always Block
(seq/comb logic)
Instance
(sub-module inst.)
Instance
(sub-module inst.)
Instance
(sub-module inst.)
Assign
(cont. assignment)
Assign
(cont. assignment)
Assign
(cont. assignment)
VectorDB
Design
Knowledge
Base
SVA Generation with ProofLoop
Large Language 
Model
Agent Loop
Observe
VectorDB Tools
Semantic Search
Module Interface
Module Interface
Desing Hierarchy
Parameters
Signal Logic
JasperGold Tools
Fan-in/Out
Flip-Flop
SVA Verification and Refinement Loop
assert 
(...)
SVA to JG 
Ver.
JG Results
Agent Loop
Observe
Verified SVA
Refinement Loop 
(Falsified/SE)
2/5
3/5
4/5
5/5
1/5
Refine SVA and 
Re-submit
Fig. 1: ProofLoop framework (Tool-augmented ReAct agent). In Phase A, the agent autonomously queries retrieval and structural analysis tools to gather
design context. In Phase B, the agent generates SVA assertions and iteratively refines them using JasperGold formal verification feedback.

Algorithm 1 Tool-in-the-Loop Calls in ProofLoop.
Require: RTL design D, NL specification s, LLM L, tools T
Ensure: Verified SVA assertion
1: AST Indexing:
2: chunks ←pyslang parse(D) {4 chunk types}
3: VectorDB.store(embed(chunks))
4: Phase A: Context Gathering (up to 6 rounds)
5: conv ←[system prompt, spec(s), design context(D)]
6: for r = 1 to 6 do
7:
msg ←L(conv, tools = T ) {ReAct: Thought+Action}
8:
if no tool calls in msg then
9:
break {Agent has enough context}
10:
end if
11:
for each tool call t in msg do
12:
obs ←T .execute(t) {Observation}
13:
conv.append(obs)
14:
end for
15: end for
16: Phase B: Generation + Verification (up to 3 rounds)
17: sva ←L.generate sva(conv)
18: for v = 1 to 3 do
19:
result ←JG.prove(sva, D)
20:
if result.status ∈{proven, undetermined} then
21:
vacuity ←JG.vacuity check(sva, D)
22:
break
23:
end if
24:
sva ←L.fix(sva, result.feedback)
25: end for
26: return sva, result
verification. The solver attempts to prove all properties within
a bounded time limit, classifying each as proven, falsified,
or undetermined. For proven or undetermined properties, we
perform an additional vacuity analysis to ensure that the proof
is non-trivial (i.e., not satisfied due to unreachable antecedents
or inactive triggering conditions). Otherwise, the solver’s error
messages and counterexample traces are fed back to the
agent, enabling targeted repair of the failing assertions rather
than blind regeneration. This feedback is programmatically
parsed and incorporated into the agent’s context for targeted
refinement. Rather than regenerating assertions from scratch,
the agent performs localized edits, e.g., correcting signal