ParikkhaChain: Blockchain-Based Result Processing
and Privacy-Preserving Academic Record
Management for the Complete Examination
Lifecycle
Rabib Jahin Ibn Momin
Department of CSE, BUET
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Ahmed Mahir Sultan Rumi
Department of CSE, BUET
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Dr. Rezwana Reaz
Department of CSE, BUET
Dhaka, Bangladesh
Abstract—Academic examination systems worldwide continue
to rely on centralised, opaque record-keeping that is often
vulnerable to credential forgery, result tampering, examiner bias,
and the absence of transparent re-evaluation pathways. Existing
blockchain-based approaches in education focus predominantly
on post-hoc certificate storage or online-only examination portals,
leaving the complete onsite examination lifecycle—from conduct-
ing exams through scrutiny—largely unaddressed. This paper
proposes ParikkhaChain, a blockchain-based framework that
covers the entire examination lifecycle of an onsite examination
system with three distinguishing contributions: (i) anonymous
script evaluation through cryptographic hashing of answer scripts
before examiner access, thereby eliminating identity-based bias;
(ii) a transparent evaluation and scrutiny workflow backed by an
immutable on-chain audit trail that records every mark submis-
sion and grade revision; and (iii) Inclusion of privacy-preserving
verification using zero-knowledge proofs and off-chain storage
mechanisms. The system is architected around four Solidity smart
contracts deployed on the Ethereum blockchain. The proposed
architecture is the first initiative to our knowledge to support
physical examination process, anonymous marking, and re-
evaluation transparency. We successfully simulate full exam cy-
cles of an onsite exam to grade-sheet generation using a working
prototype on a large scale of 100 courses and hundreds of teachers
and students. The experimental results show that the system can
manage online examinations of hundreds of courses, students
and faculties efficiently with great throughput, little storage and
transaction cost. Our codebase is available in open source form
at https://github.com/AhmedRumi/CSE6608-ParikkhaChain.
Index Terms—Smart contracts; Examination management; Zero-
knowledge proofs; IPFS; Role-based access control.
I. INTRODUCTION
The integrity of academic examinations is foundational to
educational equity: grades shape university admissions, schol-
arship awards, and professional licensing. Yet the processes
that produce those grades—script registration, examiner al-
location, marking, result tabulation, and re-evaluation—are
overwhelmingly managed through centralised, paper-based or
monolithic digital systems, specially in developing countries
like Bangladesh that offer little transparency, no anonymity,
and no tamper-evident history of changes. Credential fraud,
result manipulation, and systemic examiner bias remain per-
vasive concerns across educational systems globally [1], [5].
Blockchain technology, characterised by its decentralised dis-
tributed ledger, cryptographic immutability, and programmable
smart-contract layer, has attracted growing research interest as
a mechanism for securing educational records. Early inves-
tigations focused on issuing verifiable digital certificates [3]
or managing final transcripts [1]. A second wave of research
applied blockchain specifically to online examination portals,
demonstrating improvements in authentication, question-paper
integrity, and result transparency [4], [5]. Despite these ad-
vances, critical gaps persist: no system simultaneously ad-
dresses the full lifecycle of a physical examination, provides
on-chain anonymisation of answer scripts during marking, or
records a transparent audit trail of grade revisions through a
formal scrutiny process.
This paper presents ParikkhaChain, a blockchain-based
framework designed to address these gaps. The system man-
ages the entire examination lifecycle—exam creation, student
enrolment, script registration, anonymous evaluation, marks
submission, scrutiny, and result finalisation—using a suite
of interoperable Ethereum smart contracts. The key design
principles and contributions of the project are the following.
• Anonymous Script Evaluation. Answer scripts are up-
loaded in encrypted form and registered on-chain by a
cryptographic hash that is decoupled from the student’s
identity. Examiners receive scripts without any identity
of the student.
• Immutable Audit Trail. Every mark submission and
every subsequent grade revision is permanently recorded
on the distributed ledger.
• Role-Based
Access
Control
(RBAC). A dedicated
RBAC smart contract governs four actor roles—Admin,
Student, Examiner, and Scrutinizer—and all other con-
tracts query it before permitting any state-changing ac-
tion.
arXiv:2604.16827v1 [cs.CR] 18 Apr 2026

• Selective Zero-Knowledge Proof Verification. For third-
party credential checks (e.g. by employers or univer-
sities), students can request a ZKP that proves certain
criteria, thereby preserving privacy while enabling trust.
• Off-chain Storage with On-chain Anchoring. Large
binary artefacts (answer scripts, grade sheets) are stored
off-chain.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The literature on blockchain in education can be partitioned
into two broad clusters in our context: (i) academic credential
and document management systems that primarily target final-
outcome certificates and transcripts, and (ii) online examina-
tion systems that use blockchain to secure the delivery and
grading of digital tests.
A. Academic Credential and Document Management Systems
A significant body of work on credential security focuses
primarily on protecting final academic records rather than the
underlying examination process. For instance, Chinnasamy et
al. [1] proposed a blockchain-based framework augmented
with machine learning techniques for detecting malicious
activity and classifying documents, though it is limited to post-
issuance records. Similarly, Pandey et al. [2] introduced an
AI-driven Intelligent Document Management System (IDMS)
to improve document handling efficiency, but it relies on cen-
tralized infrastructure and lacks blockchain-based guarantees.
A hybrid approach by [3] integrates Hyperledger Fabric with
IoT and QR codes to enable secure certificate issuance and
verification, yet it remains confined to the certification stage.
Collectively, these studies emphasize securing the output of
examinations while leaving critical upstream processes—such
as marking, re-evaluation, and grade handling—outside the
trust boundary.
B. Blockchain-Based Online Examination Systems
The second strand of research applies blockchain technol-
ogy directly to the examination process, primarily in on-
line settings. Sattar et al. [4] proposed a blockchain-based
framework for securing online examinations, using encrypted
and hash-linked data storage to prevent issues such as ques-
tion leakage and answer tampering, though it is limited to
fully digital workflows. Similarly, Shirke et al. [5] intro-
duced TrustExaminator, a comprehensive system leveraging
the Ethereum blockchain, smart contracts, and facial recog-
nition for secure and automated examination management;
however, it remains focused on online exams and does not
address anonymised evaluation of physical scripts or privacy-
preserving re-evaluation processes.
C. Identified Gaps and Motivation for ParikkhaChain
The existing literature highlights several persistent limitations
in existing systems. Prior work predominantly focuses on
securing final academic outputs—such as grades and certifi-
cates—while neglecting the underlying examination processes
that generate them [1]–[3]. Moreover, most blockchain-based
solutions are designed for fully digital environments and do
not support physical, paper-based examinations that remain
prevalent in many educational contexts [4], [5]. Additionally,
these systems fail to incorporate mechanisms for anonymised
evaluation, leaving grading vulnerable to potential bias, and
they do not model scrutiny (re-evaluation) workflows or main-
tain transparent, immutable audit trails for grade changes. Col-
lectively, these gaps indicate that critical aspects of fairness,
accountability, and end-to-end trust in examination systems
remain insufficiently addressed.
III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
ParikkhaChain is organised into four conceptual layers: the
Actor Layer, the Application Layer, the Blockchain Layer,
and the Infrastructure Layer. Figure 1 presents the high-
level architecture illustrating how these layers interact. The
system is run through four smart contracts named RBAC,
HashRegistry, ResultAudit, and ExamLifeCycle Contract.
Fig. 1: High-level architecture of ParikkhaChain showing the
four-layer design: actors, application portals, blockchain smart
contracts, and infrastructure (IPFS and ZKP).
Actors can interact with the system through role-specific
application portals. Portals translate those actions into signed
Ethereum transactions that invoke smart-contract functions on
the blockchain. The smart-contract core reads and writes state
to the distributed ledger, whilst delegating large binary data to
the off-chain IPFS storage and credential proofs to the ZKP
privacy layer.
A. System Actors
The system defines four distinct actors, each with a well-
scoped set of privileges:
• Admin — The exam authority. Responsible for creat-
ing exams, enrolling students, assigning examiners, and
triggering lifecycle state transitions. All administrative

actions are verified against the RBAC contract before
execution.
• Student — Examination candidates. A student attends
the exam being held onsite (not part of the system), and
queries their results and grade sheets through the Result
Verification portal.
• Examiner — The evaluators. Examiners can access en-
crypted, identity-free answer scripts via the Evaluation
Portal for their assigned courses, assign marks, and
submit them to the ResultAudit contract. Crucially, the
examiner never sees the student’s identifying information
during this phase.
• Scrutinizer — The re-evaluators. Reviews submitted
marks, may revise the grade, and must supply a written
justification string that is permanently recorded on-chain.
B. Application Layer
The application layer exposes six portals that map directly
onto the examination lifecycle:
1) Registration Portal — Student enrolment and identity
creation. Generates a register transaction invoking the
RBAC contract.
2) Exam Management — Admin portal for creating exams
and managing state. Issues a Create Exam Transaction.
3) Script Upload Interface — Accepts scanned/digitised
answer scripts, encrypts them, stores them on IPFS, and
writes the resulting content hash via an Upload Hash
Transaction.
4) Result Verification — Allows students to query their
published results using a Query Transaction to the Re-
sultAudit contract.
5) Evaluation Portal — Allows examiners and scrutinizers
to retrieve de-identified scripts from IPFS (via the stored
hash) and submit marks. Issues Submit Marks Transac-
tions.
6) Grade Sheet Generator — Produces PDF/CSV grade
sheets from finalised on-chain results, storing the gener-
ated document in the Secure Database.
The detailed interaction between actors, portals, and smart
contracts is shown in Figure 2.
C. Smart Contracts
The four main smart contracts are the heart of the blockchain
system. They are described in this section.
1) Role-Based Access Control (RBAC Contract)
The RBAC Contract is the security foundation of the entire
system. Every other smart contract in the system queries
RBAC Contract before executing any role-specific function;
an operation that fails the role check is immediately reverted.
The contract maps Ethereum addresses to roles and supports
granting, revoking, and querying role memberships.
Fig. 2: Blockchain and application layer flow diagram showing
how each actor’s portal communicates with the four smart
contracts (RBAC, ExamLifecycle, HashRegistry, ResultAudit)
and the distributed ledger.
Four
roles
are
defined
as
ADMIN,
EXAMINER,
SCRUTINIZER,
and
STUDENT.
A
mapping
roleRegistry[address] →Role stores the current
role assignment for each registered address. An additional
mapping tracks enrolment status of students per examination,
used as a precondition for script registration.
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode for the core RBAC
operations.
2) Examination Lifecycle Contract
The ExamLifecycle Contract governs the creation of ex-
amination records and enforces strictly ordered state tran-
sitions. Each examination instance progresses through five
states: CREATED →ACTIV E →SUBMITTED →
SCRUTINIZED →COMPLETED.
No contract function is permitted to skip a state. This linear
state machine ensures, for example, that an examiner cannot
submit marks before the exam is active, and that a scrutinizer
cannot review results before the initial marks have been
submitted.
The contract also validates student enrolment (via a cross-
contract call to RBAC Contract) before accepting script hash
registrations, and exposes a getExamState() view func-
tion that other contracts query as a precondition guard.
3) Hash Registry and Anonymous Script Evaluation
The HashRegistry Contract is the mechanism that implements
anonymous evaluation. When a student’s physical answer
script (the topsheet) is scanned and digitized, the application
layer encrypts the file and uploads it to IPFS, receiving back a
content-addressed CID (Content Identifier). A Script ID (e.g.,
TS_7a8f...) is generated independently of the student’s
identity and is the only identifier recorded on-chain. The
mapping between Script ID and student identity is held off-
chain by the Admin and is only revealed after all marks have
been finalised.
The contract maintains a simple but powerful invariant: once

Algorithm 1: RBAC Contract — Role Management
1 State Variables:
2
roleRegistry: mapping(address →Role)
// Role
enum: NONE, ADMIN, EXAMINER,
SCRUTINIZER, STUDENT
3
enrollmentRegistry: mapping(examId × address →
bool)
4
deployer: address
// Set at deployment;
has bootstrap ADMIN privilege
5 Function grantRole(targetAddr, role):
6
if msg.sender ̸= deployer and
roleRegistry[msg.sender] ̸= ADMIN then
7
revert “Caller is not Admin”
8
end
9
if targetAddr = address(0) then
10
revert “Invalid address”
11
end
12
roleRegistry[targetAddr] ←role
13
emit RoleGranted(targetAddr, role, msg.sender)
14 end
15 Function revokeRole(targetAddr):
16
if roleRegistry[msg.sender] ̸= ADMIN then
17
revert “Caller is not Admin”
18
end
19
roleRegistry[targetAddr] ←NONE
20
emit RoleRevoked(targetAddr, msg.sender)
21 end
22 Function hasRole(addr, expectedRole):
23
return roleRegistry[addr] = expectedRole
24 end
25 Function enrollStudent(examId, studentAddr):
26
if not hasRole(msg.sender, ADMIN) then
27
revert “Only Admin can enroll students”
28
end
29
if roleRegistry[studentAddr] ̸= STUDENT then
30
revert “Address is not a registered Student”
31
end
32
enrollmentRegistry[examId][studentAddr] ←
true
33
emit StudentEnrolled(examId, studentAddr)
34 end
35 Function isStudentEnrolled(examId, studentAddr):
36
return enrollmentRegistry[examId][studentAddr]
37 end
a hash is registered for a Script ID, it is immutable. Any
attempt to re-register the same Script ID is rejected, preventing
tampering with the physical record after evaluation begins.
Exam Setup and Script Registration process involves RBAC,
Exam Lifecycle and HashRegistry contracts. This process is
shown in Fig. 3.
4) Result Audit Contract
The ResultAudit Contract is the most operationally complex
component of the system. It manages the full marks lifecycle:
initial submission by the examiner, optional revision by the
scrutinizer (with mandatory justification), and final result
publication. Every state change produces an immutable event
log on the blockchain, constituting the tamper-evident audit
trail. The marks submission and scrutiny process involves
interactions among all the contracts, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
D. Off-Chain Storage Architecture
Storing raw answer-scripts directly on a blockchain ledger
is impractical: Ethereum’s storage cost grows linearly with
data size, and answer scripts—even as compressed PDFs—
may be tens of megabytes each. Usually the scanning of the
top sheet should suffice. The answer scripts can be checked
offline which do not contain any identity of the student. The
topsheet and also the grade sheets and certificates of the
student are stored offchain. ParikkhaChain therefore adopts
a hybrid storage strategy illustrated in Figure 5.
The off-chain storage layer comprises two components:
a) IPFS (InterPlanetary File System) for Encrypted Scripts.
A student’s topsheet of the answer script can be uploaded via
the Script Upload Interface, the application layer performs the
following steps:
1) Encrypt the script file using a symmetric key held by the
Admin (e.g., AES-256-GCM).
2) Register the topsheet of the script which will return a
content-addressed CID.
3) Compute keccak256(CID) to produce a fixed-length
32-byte hash.
4) Call
HashRegistry
Con-
tract.registerHash(scriptId, hash) to anchor
the reference on-chain immutably.
When an Examiner or Scrutinizer requests a script via the
Evaluation Portal, the portal retrieves the hash from the
blockchain, fetches the corresponding ciphertext from IPFS,
decrypts it using the Admin-controlled key, and presents the
plaintext script—still without any student identifying meta-
data.
b) Secure Database for Temporary Data.
Grade sheets generated as PDF or CSV documents are stored
in a secure, access-controlled relational database as temporary
data. These documents are produced from finalised on-chain
results and are made available to students through the Result
Verification portal. Because grade sheets are derivative outputs
(their source of truth is the immutable ledger), no long-term
off-chain storage guarantee is required for them.
E. Privacy Layer and Zero-Knowledge Proofs
Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) in blockchain are crypto-
graphic methods allowing one party (prover) to prove to
another (verifier) that a statement is valid—such as having

Fig. 3: Exam Setup & Script Registration
Fig. 4: Marks Subsmission & Scrutiny
Fig. 5: Off-chain storage architecture. Encrypted scripts are
persisted on IPFS; the HashRegistry contract holds only
the cryptographic hash reference. Grade-sheet documents
(PDF/CSV) are generated into a temporary secure database.
sufficient funds or authorized identity—without revealing the
underlying private data. We use selective Zero-Knowledge
Proof (ZKP) verification for some operations in the system.
Here, the prover is student and the verifier is an employer or
any other third-party verifier. A recurring challenge in aca-
demic credential systems is the tension between verifiability
and privacy. For example, a student may wish to prove to a
third-party employer that they passed an examination with-
out revealing their exact score. ParikkhaChain addresses this
through selective Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) verification,
as illustrated in Figure 6. A student can generate a proof
using ZKP Generator which can be presented to the third
party without verifying the whole information of the student.
The verifier validates the proof mathematically using the ZKP
Verifier component. No query to the blockchain ledger is
needed, and no grade data is revealed.

Fig. 6: Privacy layer architecture. The ResultAudit contract
generates a proof request; the ZKP Generator constructs a
validity proof; the Third-Party Verifier validates the proof
without accessing the underlying grade data.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
This section describes the implementation stack, development
environment and the metrics used for the ParikkhaChain
prototype. The primary goal of the prototype is a full-cycle
demonstration: to exercise every phase of the exam cycle
end-to-end on a local or test-net Ethereum environment using
mock examination data, and to evaluate the system’s functional
correctness and workflow integrity.
A. Blockchain Layer
The smart contracts are implemented in Solidity (target com-
piler ≥0.8.x) chosen because of its strong static typing,
and the maturity of its tooling ecosystem. All four contracts
(RBAC Contract, Exam Lifecycle Contract, Hash Registry
Contract, ResultAudit Contract) are authored and compiled
using Remix IDE. We worked on both the Ethereum Vir-
tual Machine (EVM) and local machine. Remix provides an
integrated Solidity compiler, a JavaScript EVM for rapid local
testing, and a one-click deployment interface to public testnets.
B. Mock Data, Automation Scripts and Offchain Storage
For the prototype in this project, we have not implemented the
frontend or user portals for the system. Rather, we directly call
the functions of the smart contracts to simulate the exam cycle.
To automate the process, we generate large amount of mock
data. The mock data contains a set of courses, students, and
teachers, each course containing the list of registered students
and assigned evaluators and scrutinizers.
For the offchian storage, we just use our local machine storage
in this project.
C. Evaluation Metrics
The prototype will be evaluated against the following metrics:
• Throughput: Number of transactions processed per
minute.
• Gas Cost: Ethereum gas cost (in ETH and dollars) for
contract deployment and transaction processing, mea-
sured on the Remix IDE.
• Storage: Storage needed for the smart contracts and the
data generated in the system.
TABLE I: Development environment configuration
Component
Configuration
Smart Contract Lan-
guage
Solidity ≥0.8.20
IDE
Remix IDE (Web App)
Local
Ethereum
Node
Remix JavaScript VM
Backend Language
Python 3
Blockchain Library
Web3.py v6.x
Hash Library
hashlib + pysha3 (keccak256)
IPFS (prototype)
Mock local file server
ZKP (prototype)
Commit-Reveal scheme
Grade Sheet Genera-
tion
Python reportlab (PDF), csv
module
Version Control
Git
V. RESULTS
The ParikkhaChain prototype was deployed and evaluated on
Remix ID Desktop App using our local machine. We used
Python automation scripts to simulate the exam scenarios.
Performance was measured across three exam scenarios of
increasing scale — Small, Medium, and Large — to assess
throughput, gas cost, and on-chain storage overhead. Gas
pricing was referenced at 0.044 gwei and ETH at $2154 USD.
Storage overhead is estimated using a gas-based estimation
(Estimates bytes written to storage during workflow execution.
Approximately 35% of smart contract gas is consumed by
SSTORE operations — an empirical figure consistent with
Ethereum gas profiling literature [6]. The Large scenario is
the primary benchmark, representing a realistic departmental
workload of the CSE Department, BUET.
A. Scenario Overview
We had 5, 25, and 100 course exams with 43, 605, and 4,439
scripts registered in the small, medium, and large scenarios,
respectively. All of the 261, 2,747, and 18,930 transactions in
these scenarios completed with a 0% failure rate, confirming
the correctness of the smart-contract logic and the robustness
of the automation scripts across widely varying workload
sizes.
B. Large-Scale Scenario: BUET CSE Departmental Workload
The Large scenario was designed to mirror the realistic exam-
ination workload of the CSE Department, BUET: 100 exams
covering approximately 4,439 student scripts across all courses
and semesters in a given academic term. Table II presents the
complete performance profile for this scenario.
a) Throughput.
The system processed 18,930 transactions in 9,555 seconds
(2 hours 39 minutes), sustaining a throughput of 1.98 tx/s

TABLE II: Full performance metrics — Large scenario (BUET CSE workload)
Metric
Value
Accuracy
Notes
Metric 1 — Throughput
Total transactions
18,930
Exact
Incl. 4 deployments
Workflow transactions
18,926
Exact
Excl. deployments
Failed transactions
0
Exact
0% failure rate
Elapsed time
9,555 s (2h 39m)
Exact
Ganache local chain
Throughput (total)
1.98 tx/s
Exact
118.87 tx/min
Throughput (workflow)
1.98 tx/s
Exact
Excl. deployments
Metric 2 — Transaction Cost
Total gas used (all)
4,989,664,028
Exact
Incl. deployments
Workflow gas used
4,981,280,046
Exact
Excl. deployments
Avg gas per workflow tx
263,197
Exact
Workflow cost (ETH)
0.22 ETH
Estimated
@ 0.044 gwei
Workflow cost (USD)
$472.30
Estimated
@ ETH = $2154.93
Avg cost per tx (USD)
$15.79
Estimated
Metric 3A — Execution Storage (Gas-based Estimation)
Storage fraction of workflow gas
35%
Estimated
Per EIP-2929
SSTORE operations
87,172 ops
Estimated
= 35% × G/20,000
Execution storage written
2,724.12 KB
Estimated
87,172 × 32 bytes
Gas Breakdown by Contract
ResultAudit Contract
2,374,867,868
gas
(47.6%)
Exact
9,128 tx, 260,173 avg gas/tx
HashRegistry Contract
2,027,244,993
gas
(40.6%)
Exact
4,439 tx, 456,689 avg gas/tx
ExamLifecycle Contract
546,600,233
gas
(11.0%)
Exact
4,939 tx, 110,670 avg gas/tx
RBAC Contract
32,566,952 gas (0.7%)
Exact
420 tx, 77,540 avg gas/tx
Deployments
8,383,982 gas (0.2%)
Exact
4 contracts
on the local environment. This throughput is sufficient for
examination management workflows, where transactions are
batched by the automation layer rather than submitted inter-
actively in real time. The throughput is slightly lower than
the medium scenario (2.24 tx/s) because the larger number
of SSTORE-heavy ResultAudit Contract and HashRegistry
Contract transactions increases average block processing time
at high volume.
b) Gas Cost.
The ResultAudit Contract and HashRegistry Contract together
account for 88.2% of total workflow gas, reflecting the high
storage cost of persisting mark records, audit log entries, and
script hashes for 4,439 scripts. The RBAC Contract consumes
only 0.7% of workflow gas, confirming that the role-check
guard pattern adds negligible overhead. The approximate total
workflow cost is $472.30, which is quite feasible for a full
exam cycle of a semester for a department.
c) On-Chain Storage.
Using the gas-based estimation method, the workflow gener-
ated an estimated 87,172 SSTORE operations, writing approx-
imately 2.66 MB of execution state to the distributed ledger
for 4,439 scripts. The fixed bytecode footprint of 36.07 KB
(across all four contracts) is invariant across scenarios and well
within Ethereum’s EIP-170 per-contract size limit of 24,576

bytes. Thus, the memory requirement is quite low indeed.
C. Scalability Analysis
Figure 7 and Figure 8 present the scalability of gas cost
and on-chain storage overhead respectively as the examination
workload grows from the Small to the Large scenario.
Fig. 7: Gas cost scalability across three exam scenarios. Left
axis (blue bars): total workflow gas consumed in billions of gas
units. Right axis (orange bars): equivalent USD cost at 0.044
gwei gas price and ETH = $2154.93. Both metrics scale near-
linearly with the number of scripts registered.
Fig. 8: On-chain execution storage scalability across three
exam scenarios (gas-based estimation). Bars show estimated
storage written to the ledger in KB; the dashed orange line
tracks the number of scripts registered. Storage growth closely
follows script count, confirming linear scaling behaviour.
As presented in Figures 7 and 8, we observe that the system
exhibits near-linear growth in both gas consumption and
storage as the number of scripts increases, with minor sub-
linear behavior at smaller scales due to amortized fixed setup
costs. As workload grows, per-script costs dominate, making
resource usage predictable and proportional to script count.
Additionally, throughput remains stable across all scales, indi-
cating that performance is not impacted by increased workload
and is primarily constrained by block time rather than system
complexity. Overall, the system proves to be quite scalable
and can handle even thousands of exams, millions of students
and teachers with proper resources.
D. Zero Knowledge Proof
This scheme demonstrates a Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP)
protocol operating through four phases among three actors
— Admin, Student, and a Third Party. In Phase 1, the
Admin retrieves finalized marks and generates a random salt,
computing a commitment hash off-chain using keccak256
over the scaled CGPA, marks, credits, and salt, then storing
only this hash on-chain while keeping actual academic data
private. In Phase 2, the Third Party posts eligibility criteria on-
chain — including minimum CGPA, grade thresholds, credit
requirements, and pass conditions — making them publicly
visible and tamper-proof. In Phase 3, the Student proves their
eligibility by submitting their actual marks, CGPA, and salt to
the contract, which recomputes and verifies the hash against
the stored commitment, evaluates all criteria, and records only
a boolean outcome without ever storing raw marks on-chain.
Finally, in Phase 4, the Third Party queries the contract and
receives solely a true/false eligibility result — learning nothing
about the underlying academic details — which is the core
ZKP property: proving knowledge of a fact without revealing
the fact itself. Detailed screenshots of the whole process are
given in our github repository.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented ParikkhaChain, a blockchain-based
system for managing the complete lifecycle of onsite academic
examinations with anonymous evaluation, transparent scrutiny,
and privacy-preserving result verification across three exam-
ination scenarios of increasing scale. The system achieved
a 0% transaction failure rate across all 18,930 transac-
tions in the largest scenario, sustained a stable throughput
of approximately 1.98 tx/s, and successfully registered 4,439
scripts and 100 exams representing the realistic workload of
the CSE Department, BUET. Gas cost and on-chain storage
scaled near-linearly with script count: the Large scenario
consumed 4.98 billion gas units and wrote an estimated 2.66
MB of execution state to the ledger, confirming predictable and
plannable resource growth. The HashRegistry Contract and
ResultAudit Contract together account for 88.2% of workflow
gas, reflecting the storage intensity of anonymous script an-
choring and immutable audit-log maintenance — the two most
novel contributions of the system. We showed that the system
that efficiently scales with the largest scenario requiring an
approximate amount of $472 and minimal storage.
The prototype can be further developed in many directions,
including multi-semester transcript management, degree cer-
tificate issuance on blockchain, advanced ZKP for granular
verification, Support for diverse exam formats, an automated
testing suite, cross-institutional result verification, Mobile and
web applications and so on. It is also a first step towards
developing a national education blockchain consortium for
national-level examinations.