1
Breaking Euston: Recovering Private Inputs from
Secure Inference by Exploiting Subspace Leakage
Jiaqi Zhao
and Fengwei Wang
Abstract—In the 47th IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (IEEE S&P 2026), Gao et al. proposed an efficient and
user-friendly secure transformer inference framework, namely
Euston. In Euston, a singular value decomposition-based matrix
transmission protocol is designed to efficiently transmit input
matrices, reducing communication bandwidth by approximately
2.8×. In this manuscript, we show that this transmission protocol
introduces subspace leakage of random masks, enabling the
model owner to recover private samples easily. We further
validate the effectiveness of the recovery attack through simple
experiments on image and language datasets, highlighting a
fundamental privacy risk of the protocol design.
Index Terms—Secure inference, singular value decomposition,
data privacy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Secure inference [1] has emerged as a critical paradigm
in privacy-preserving machine learning, which enables model
inference on sensitive user data without exposing the raw
inputs. In this paradigm, a user typically encrypts the private
input, based on fully homomorphic encryption (FHE) or secure
multi-party computation (MPC) techniques, and sends it to an
untrusted model owner. The model owner performs inference
over the protected representation and returns the corresponding
prediction results.
In recent years, with the rapid development of large lan-
guage models, secure inference has been extended from tra-
ditional neural networks to transformer models. Secure trans-
former inference faces additional challenges due to the high-
dimensional attention mechanisms and the substantial com-
munication and computation overhead introduced by privacy-
preserving techniques.
To tackle these challenges, Gao et al. [2] proposed Euston,
an efficient and user-friendly secure transformer inference
framework, in the 47th IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy (IEEE S&P 2026), in which they designed an efficient
matrix transmission protocol based on singular value decom-
position (SVD) to submit input matrices. Specifically, the user
masks the input matrices, where the masks are decomposed
via SVD into two orthogonal matrices and a singular value
vector. Only the singular value vector is encrypted via FHE
and uploaded to the model owner, while the remaining com-
ponents are transmitted in plaintext. Then, the model owner
utilizes them to recover the original inputs over ciphertexts
and performs model inference. However, although the singular
Jiaqi Zhao and Fengwei Wang are with the School of Cyber En-
gineering,
Xidian
University,
Xi’an
710126,
Shaanxi,
China
(e-mail:
jqzhao@xidian.edu.cn, and wangfengwei@xidian.edu.cn).
value vector is encrypted, the two orthogonal matrices still
reveal the subspace of random masks.
In this manuscript, we design a data recovery attack against
Euston by exploiting the subspace leakage. Specifically, we
first revisit the matrix transmission protocol in Euston and
identify its privacy vulnerabilities. Then, we present our attack
and provide a theoretical analysis of its effectiveness. Finally,
we empirically validate the attack on both image and language
datasets.
II. REVISITING EUSTON
Euston is a two-party and non-interactive secure transformer
inference framework, which consists of a user (U) and a model
owner (MO). U submits the input matrix A ∈Rm×n to MO,
and MO computes the inference result M(A) with its model
M and returns it to U.
Based on FHE and SVD, the matrix transmission protocol
is used to securely and efficiently transmit the input matrix A,
which is executed via offline and online phases.
A. Offline Phase
In this phase, U first generates a random matrix R ∈Rm×n
with the same size as A. Then, it decomposes the matrix R
through the SVD algorithm to obtain two orthogonal matrices
U ∈Rm×m, H ∈Rm×n, and a diagonal matrix D ∈Rm×m,
which satisfies
R = UDH.
The diagonal values of D can also be represented as the
singular value vector d = {d1, d2, · · · , dm}. Finally, d is
encrypted to JdK by FHE, and U sends JdK, U, H to MO.
For MO, it extends JdK to JDK, and computes
JRWK = U ⊗JDK ⊗HW,
where ⊗denotes the homomorphic multiplication, and W is
the weight matrix of the model M.
Note that the vector d is packed before the encryption in
Euston, and all subsequent computations are performed over
the packed ciphertexts. However, our attack is not related to
the packing method, so we omit its detailed description for
clarity. Similarly, the specific FHE scheme used in Euston is
also independent of our attack and is not discussed in this
manuscript.
arXiv:2604.17238v1 [cs.CR] 19 Apr 2026

2
B. Online Phase
In the online phase, U uses the random matrix R to mask
the private input A via
X = A −R ∈Rm×n,
and sends X to MO. After that, MO computes
JAWK = JRWK ⊕XW,
where ⊕is the homomorphic addition. Then, a series of secure
and efficient protocols, including matrix multiplication and
layer normalization, are applied to the subsequent inference
process to produce the final result. Since this manuscript
focuses on the security of the matrix transmission protocol,
we do not provide detailed descriptions of the subsequent
protocols in Euston.
Originally, m × n values are required to be encrypted and
transmitted. With the above secure transmission protocol, this
requirement is reduced to m values, thereby significantly de-
creasing the communication overhead incurred when initiating
an inference request.
However, in the above protocol, the orthogonal matrices U
and H are leaked to MO, which denotes the row and column
subspaces of the masking matrix R. Therefore, it is possible
for MO to recover R from U and H, thereby enabling the
reconstruction of the original input A.
III. DATA RECOVERY ATTACK
In this section, we present our attack method to recover the
original input in Euston. First, after receiving the masked input
X, MO computes
ˆD = U T XHT ∈Rm×n.
Then, it extracts the diagonal matrix ˜D = diag( ˆD) as an
approximation of matrix D. After that, the random matrix ˜R
is recovered approximately through
˜R = −U ˜DH,
and the recovered input is ˜A = X + ˜R.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of the attack, we first
theoretically analyze the relative recovery error (RRE), which
quantifies the discrepancy between the recovered sample ˜A
and the original sample A. It is defined as:
RRE = ∥˜A −A∥F
∥A∥F
,
where ∥· ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm.
Theorem 1. The expected relative recovery error satisfies
E[∥˜A −A∥F
∥A∥F
] ≤
1
√n.
Proof. Since X = A −R = A −UDH, we have
ˆD = U T XHT = U T AHT −U T UDHHT .
Using U T U = Im and HHT = Im, it follows that
ˆD = U T AHT −D.
Therefore,
˜D = diag( ˆD) = diag(U T AHT ) −D.
Thus,
˜R = −U ˜DH = R −Udiag(U T AHT )H.
Substituting into ˜A = X + ˜R, we obtain
˜A = (A −R) + ˜R = A −Udiag(U T AHT )H.
Hence,
˜A −A = −Udiag(U T AHT )H.
By the unitary invariance of the Frobenius norm,
∥˜A −A∥F =
diag(U T AHT )

F .
In Euston, since U and H are random orthogonal factors, the
diagonal energy of a matrix is no larger than its total Frobenius
energy,
∥˜A −A∥F ≤∥U T AHT ∥F = ∥A∥F .
For the expectation bound, since U and H are random
orthogonal factors independent of A, the energy of U T AHT
is uniformly distributed over its mn entries in expectation.
Therefore, each entry has expected squared magnitude ∥A∥2
F
mn .
Since there are m diagonal entries,
E[∥˜A −A∥2
F ] = m · ∥A∥2
F
mn
= 1
n∥A∥2
F .
Therefore,
E[∥˜A −A∥F
∥A∥F
] ≤
1
√n.
The proof is complete.
Therefore, the expected relative recovery error vanishes as n
increases, which means that the reconstructed input ˜A becomes
increasingly close to the original input A. For common high-
dimensional inputs such as those in Transformers or images,
the error is small, indicating that MO can effectively recon-
struct the user’s input.
IV. ATTACK EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
data recovery attack. Following Euston, we adopt the GLUE
benchmark, including RTE, SST-2, and QNLI, and use the
BERT-base model for evaluation. The effectiveness of the
attack is also measured by RRE. Moreover, we also evaluate
the attack on the CIFAR-100 image dataset to provide a more
intuitive demonstration of its effectiveness.
From TABLE I, we observe that the REE remains consis-
tently low across all four datasets. It indicates that our attack
can be executed successfully regardless of the masking scale
η, because the recovery mainly depends on the leaked singular
subspaces rather than the scale of the mask. Moreover, since
the input matrices of the three language datasets share the
same dimensionality, their RRE values are also very close. In
contrast, CIFAR-100 exhibits a relatively larger RRE due to
its smaller input size, which is consistent with our theoretical

3
Original
Masked
Recovered
(a) η = 0.5
Original
Masked
Recovered
(b) η = 1
Original
Masked
Recovered
(c) η = 10
Original
Masked
Recovered
(d) η = 100
Fig. 1. The original, masked, and recovered samples with different masking scales on the CIFAR-100 dataset.
TABLE I
THE RELATIVE RECOVERY ERRORS UNDER DIFFERENT MASKING SCALES η
Datasets
η = 0.5
η = 1
η = 10
η = 100
RTE
0.036
0.036
0.036
0.036
SST-2
0.036
0.036
0.035
0.037
QNLI
0.036
0.036
0.037
0.036
CIFAR-100
0.178
0.180
0.174
0.178
analysis in Section III, indicating that the attack becomes more
effective as the input dimensionality increases.
In Fig. 1, we present the original, masked, and recovered
samples under different masking scales on the CIFAR-100
dataset. First, we observe that small masking scales fail to
fully obscure the original images. Moreover, regardless of the
masking scale, our attack consistently recovers the original
images with high fidelity, demonstrating its effectiveness.
V. CONCLUSION
In this manuscript, we have proposed a data recovery attack
against the subspace leakage in Euston. Through theoretical
analysis and extensive experimental evaluation, we demon-
strate the effectiveness of the proposed attack. Our results
indicate that, in the secure inference framework, encrypting
only the low-rank representations of the original data or inter-
mediate matrices is often insufficient to fully ensure privacy
protection, and such design choices require rigorous security
scrutiny.