LLM-CEG: Extending the Classification Error Gauge
Framework for Privacy Auditing of Large Language Models
Kato Mivule
— Computer Science Dept. Bowie State University —
kmivule@gmail.com
Abstract
This paper extends the Classification Error Gauge
(x-CEG) framework, originally developed for mea-
suring
the
privacy-utility
trade-off
in
tabular
datasets [1], to privacy auditing of Large Language
Models (LLMs).
We propose LLM-CEG, a sys-
tematic framework that employs membership in-
ference attack (MIA) success rates as an empiri-
cal privacy gauge and model perplexity as a utility
gauge, iteratively adjusting differential privacy pa-
rameters until both thresholds are jointly satisfied.
A proof-of-concept prototype fine-tunes DistilGPT-
2 on a synthetic clinical PII dataset under four pri-
vacy regimes using DP-SGD. Results indicate that
DP-SGD reduces MIA attacker advantage by 71.5%
while simultaneously improving out-of-distribution
utility by 47–50% relative to the overfitted baseline,
suggesting that differential privacy may act as im-
plicit regularization under narrow fine-tuning con-
ditions.
We further extend the SIED engineering
framework [1] to the LLM context as LLM-SIED,
providing an auditable, regulator-aligned process for
privacy-compliant LLM deployment.
Keywords:
Large Language Models; Differential
Privacy; Membership Inference Attacks; Classifica-
tion Error Gauge; Privacy-Utility Trade-off; DP-
SGD; Implicit Regularization; Human-Centric Pri-
vacy; LLM Privacy Auditing.
1
Introduction
The original x-CEG framework established a foun-
dational principle: the privacy-utility trade-off in a
dataset can be measured empirically by passing pri-
vatized data through a machine learning classifier
and observing the classification error [1]. A lower
error signals better utility; a higher error signals
stronger privacy.
This principle was validated on
tabular datasets using Gaussian, logarithmic, and
multiplicative noise perturbation, as well as differ-
ential privacy with Laplace noise [2].
A decade later, this problem has re-emerged in a dra-
matically more complex form. Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs) — including GPT-4, Claude, LLaMA,
and Gemini — are trained on massive corpora that
inevitably contain private, sensitive, or copyrighted
information.
Unlike tabular databases, LLMs do
not publish a dataset; they memorize and reproduce
training data implicitly through their model param-
eters, creating a new class of privacy threat in which
the model itself becomes the attack surface.
Two critical risks converge: membership inference
attacks (MIA) [5] — techniques that determine
whether a specific record was part of a model’s train-
ing set — and insufficient differential privacy guar-
antees during LLM training [3]. Existing privacy au-
diting tools for LLMs are fragmented, lack standard-
ized evaluation metrics, and provide no systematic
engineering process.
The central question this paper addresses is whether
the privacy-utility trade-off in fine-tuned LLMs can
be measured, managed, and communicated in a way
that is actionable for clinicians, regulators, and or-
ganizational decision-makers, not just technical spe-
cialists. We argue that it can, and that doing so is
essential for building public trust in AI systems that
handle sensitive data.
This work makes four contributions: (1) the LLM-
CEG framework extending x-CEG to language
model privacy auditing via MIA-based empirical
gauging; (2) the LLM-SIED engineering process for
privacy-compliant LLM deployment aligned with the
EU AI Act and NIST AI RMF; (3) a proof-of-
concept prototype with empirical validation on syn-
1
arXiv:2604.23795v1 [cs.CR] 26 Apr 2026

thetic clinical PII data, reproducible on a single
CPU machine; and (4) the novel finding that DP-
SGD acts as implicit regularization, improving out-
of-distribution utility under narrow fine-tuning con-
ditions.
A key preliminary finding of this work is that differ-
ential privacy may challenge the conventional view of
privacy and utility as fundamentally in tension. Un-
der narrow fine-tuning conditions — such as small,
repetitive clinical datasets — initial results indicate
that DP noise may function as implicit regulariza-
tion, simultaneously protecting privacy and improv-
ing model generalization. Together, LLM-CEG and
LLM-SIED suggest that protecting sensitive data
and maintaining model utility may be achievable si-
multaneously, supporting the development of trust-
worthy, human-centric AI systems.
2
Background
To ensure accessibility across disciplines — including
computer science, social sciences, ethics, and health-
care policy — this section defines the key terms and
notation used throughout the paper.
2.1
Glossary of Key Terms
Large Language Model (LLM): An AI system trained
on large text corpora to generate, summarize, and
reason over natural language.
Personally Identifiable Information (PII): Data that
can identify a specific individual, including names,
social security numbers, medical diagnoses, and fi-
nancial records.
Differential Privacy (DP): A mathematical frame-
work providing a quantifiable guarantee of individ-
ual privacy. Intuitively, a DP model behaves almost
identically whether or not any single individual’s
data was included in training, preventing adversarial
inference about any specific person.
Privacy Budget (ε, epsilon): The numerical param-
eter controlling the degree of privacy protection. A
smaller ε means stronger privacy — more noise is
added, making individual records harder to infer. A
larger ε means weaker privacy but typically better
model utility.
Privacy Failure Probability (δ): A small probabil-
ity parameter paired with ε in (ε, δ)-DP guarantees.
It bounds the likelihood that the privacy guaran-
tee fails catastrophically for any single individual.
In practice, δ is set to a very small value (e.g.,
10−5), meaning the guarantee holds with overwhelm-
ing probability across training.
DP-SGD: Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient
Descent. The standard algorithm for training ma-
chine learning models with differential privacy guar-
antees. It adds carefully calibrated random noise to
the model’s learning process at each training step.
Gradient Descent: The core optimization algorithm
used to train neural networks. At each training step,
the model computes how much each parameter con-
tributed to the prediction error (the gradient) and
adjusts the parameters in the direction that reduces
that error. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) per-
forms this update on small random subsets (mini-
batches) of the training data rather than the full
dataset, making training computationally feasible
for large models.
Implicit Regularization:
A phenomenon in which
a training procedure unintentionally constrains a
model’s complexity beyond what is explicitly speci-
fied. In this work, DP-SGD noise appears to function
as implicit regularization — analogously to weight
decay or dropout — preventing the model from over-
fitting to a narrow training distribution and thereby
preserving generalization to out-of-distribution text.
This is a preliminary observation that warrants fur-
ther investigation and replication.
Model Collapse: A failure mode in which a language
model, after fine-tuning on a narrow or repetitive
dataset, loses the broad language capabilities it ac-
quired during pre-training. The model’s output be-
comes confined to the fine-tuning distribution, pro-
ducing degraded or repetitive text for inputs out-
side that domain. In this work, the baseline model
(trained without DP) exhibits signs of collapse, with
perplexity on general text rising to 179.91 compared
to 119–122 for DP-trained variants.
Opacus Library:
An open-source PyTorch library
developed by Meta that implements DP-SGD for
training neural networks with differential privacy.
Opacus handles the per-sample gradient computa-
2

tion, gradient clipping, and noise injection required
by DP-SGD, and automatically computes the pri-
vacy cost (ε, δ) for a given training configuration us-
ing the Renyi Differential Privacy accountant.
Renyi Differential Privacy (RDP) Accountant:
A
mathematical tool for tracking the cumulative pri-
vacy cost across all steps of DP-SGD training.
Rather than naively summing per-step privacy costs
— which would produce overly conservative bounds
— the RDP accountant uses the Renyi divergence
to compute tighter privacy guarantees. The result is
a more accurate final (ε, δ) budget that reflects the
true privacy expenditure of the full training run.
Pareto Analysis; Pareto Curve: A method for eval-
uating trade-offs between two competing objectives.
In LLM-CEG, the two objectives are privacy (mea-
sured by MIA attacker advantage) and utility (mea-
sured by perplexity). A Pareto curve plots model
configurations in this two-dimensional space; a con-
figuration is Pareto-optimal if no other configuration
achieves better privacy without sacrificing utility, or
better utility without sacrificing privacy. The Pareto
curve makes the privacy-utility frontier empirically
visible and navigable for practitioners.
Membership Inference Attack (MIA): An adversarial
technique used to determine whether a specific data
record was part of a model’s training set. High MIA
accuracy indicates memorization and privacy leak-
age; an MIA success rate near 50% (random guess-
ing) indicates strong empirical privacy protection.
Attacker Advantage:
The excess accuracy an at-
tacker achieves above random guessing (50%). An
advantage of 0.35 means the attacker is 35 percent-
age points better than chance, indicating significant
memorization and privacy leakage.
Perplexity (PPL): A standard measure of language
model performance. Lower perplexity means better
language understanding and is used here as the util-
ity metric.
SIED Framework: Specifications, Implementation,
Evaluation, Dissemination — a systematic engineer-
ing process for data privacy originally proposed in [1]
for tabular data, extended here to LLMs as LLM-
SIED.
AUROC: Area Under the ROC Curve. A threshold-
free measure of classifier performance. An AUROC
of 0.5 means random guessing (no privacy leakage);
an AUROC near 1.0 means near-perfect attack suc-
cess.
NIST AI RMF: The National Institute of Standards
and Technology AI Risk Management Framework —
U.S. guidance for managing AI risks, including pri-
vacy and trustworthiness.
EU AI Act: The European Union’s 2024 regulation
governing AI development and deployment, includ-
ing requirements for transparency, documentation,
and data protection.
x-CEG: Classification Error Gauge — the privacy-
utility measurement framework proposed in [1] for
tabular data, extended here to LLMs as LLM-CEG.
AdamW Optimizer:
A variant of the Adam op-
timization algorithm that incorporates weight de-
cay (L2 regularization) directly into the parame-
ter update step.
AdamW is widely used for fine-
tuning transformer-based language models because
it adapts the learning rate per parameter and pre-
vents weights from growing unboundedly, improving
generalization.
2.2
Differential
Privacy:
A
Plain-
Language Formulation
Differential privacy works by adding controlled ran-
dom noise to a computation so that no single indi-
vidual’s record has a distinguishable effect on the
output. For a query function f(x), where x repre-
sents a dataset, the Laplace mechanism produces a
privatized output as:
M(x) = f(x) + Lap

0, ∆f
ε

(1)
where M(x) is the privatized output published to
the world; f(x) is the true result of the query on the
data (for example, the average salary in a database);
Lap(0, ∆f/ε) is random noise drawn from a Laplace
distribution centered at zero; ∆f is the sensitivity of
the query — how much a single individual’s record
can change the result (for example, if the highest-
earning person in a dataset earns $1 billion per
month and the lowest earns $12 per hour, the sensi-
tivity spans this entire range); and ε is the privacy
3

budget, where smaller values produce more noise and
stronger protection.
In practice, the larger the gap between the most
and least influential record, the more noise must be
added to achieve the same level of privacy. This is
why enterprise datasets with extreme outliers require
careful ε calibration.
2.3
DP-SGD: Training LLMs with Pri-
vacy
For training LLMs, we apply DP-SGD [3], which ap-
plies differential privacy at each step of model train-
ing. At step t, the algorithm produces a privatized
gradient update:
˜gt =
1
|Bt|
 X
i∈Bt
gt,i
max(1, ∥gt,i∥2/C)
!
+ N
 0, σ2C2I

(2)
where ˜gt is the privatized gradient used to update
the model; Bt is the mini-batch of training records
at step t; gt,i is the gradient for individual record
i; C is the clipping norm, which limits how much
any single training example can influence the model
update, preventing any one record from dominating
learning; σ is the noise multiplier, controlling how
much Gaussian noise N is added; and I is the iden-
tity matrix. In our experiments, σ is automatically
set by the Opacus library to achieve the target pri-
vacy budget ε over the full training run, with the
privacy cost tracked using the Renyi Differential Pri-
vacy (RDP) accountant [3], which provides tighter
privacy bounds than basic composition by accumu-
lating the privacy cost step by step across training.
In plain terms: at every training step, DP-SGD lim-
its how much any single patient record can influence
the model’s learning, then adds calibrated noise to
further obscure individual contributions. The result
is a model that has learned from the population of
records without memorizing any individual’s data.
Figure 1 shows where in the training pipeline this
noise is actually applied. The proprietary dataset it-
self is never modified; DP-SGD operates strictly on
the gradients computed from each mini-batch, form-
ing an “Opacus privacy wall” between raw learning
1. Proprietary data (untouched)
?
2. Tokenize & embed (still clean)
?
3. Compute per-sample gradients
?
PRIVACY WALL (DP-SGD)
4a. Clip each gradient to norm C
4b. Add noise N(0, σ2C2I)
?
5. Privatized gradient ˜gt
?
6. Update model weights
?
7. Released LLM (DP-guaranteed)
Figure 1: The DP-SGD privacy wall. Raw data and
embeddings pass through unmodified; noise is injected
only at the gradient stage (steps 4a–4b), between learning
and the model weights. The RDP accountant aggregates
the per-step privacy cost into the final (ε, δ) guarantee
reported for the released model.
signals and the model weights that are ultimately
released.
3
Theoretical Foundation
3.1
Bridging x-CEG and LLM Privacy
The original x-CEG logic maps directly onto the
LLM context.
Table 1 establishes the formal cor-
respondence.
Table 1: Correspondence between x-CEG (tabular) and
LLM-CEG
Original
x-CEG
(Tabular)
LLM-CEG
(Language
Models)
Original dataset X
Pre-training corpus
Privacy procedure
DP-SGD;
perturbation;
unlearning
Privatized dataset Y
Trained LLM weights
ML classifier
Membership inference at-
tack
Classification error
MIA attacker advantage
Utility threshold
Perplexity; task accuracy
4

In x-CEG, a high classification error on privatized
data signals strong privacy but low utility. In LLM-
CEG, a high MIA success rate signals weak pri-
vacy. The gauge is inverted — but the feedback loop
logic is identical: adjust ε iteratively until an accept-
able MIA success rate is achieved without sacrificing
model utility.
4
Literature Review
4.1
Scope and Organization
The intersection of differential privacy and LLMs
has become one of the most active areas in AI
safety research during 2022–2026. This review is se-
lective rather than exhaustive, focusing on highly
cited or methodologically significant works that di-
rectly inform LLM-CEG. It is not intended as a
comprehensive survey but as a contextual position-
ing of our contributions within the recent literature.
Five themes are surveyed: DP fine-tuning, MIA re-
search, privacy-utility trade-offs, human-centric pri-
vacy, and LLM governance.
4.2
DP Techniques for LLM Fine-Tuning
Behnia et al. [9] introduce EW-Tune, using an Edge-
worth accountant for tighter per-iteration DP-SGD
bounds, achieving up to 1.1% utility improvement.
Their finding that tighter accounting yields utility
gains resonates with LLM-CEG’s implicit regular-
ization observation.
Alghamdi [10] proposes PrivLLM-Guard, an adap-
tive DP framework for clinical LLMs with hierar-
chical ε allocation per medical data category. It is
the most directly adjacent prior work to LLM-CEG
in the clinical domain, but does not report MIA-
based empirical privacy evaluation — a gap LLM-
CEG fills.
Higashi and Nakai [11] evaluate DP-enhanced LoRA
(parameter-efficient fine-tuning) and find that ε
changes produce minimal impact on MIA metrics,
independently corroborating LLM-CEG’s plateau
observation across ε ∈{0.5, 2.0, 8.0}.
Wu [12] reveals variance in empirical DP protec-
tion across configurations sharing the same nomi-
nal ε, validating LLM-CEG’s methodology of pair-
ing formal guarantees with empirical MIA evaluation
rather than relying on ε alone.
Hanke et al. [13] demonstrate that closed-LLM pri-
vate adaptation methods leak query or training data
to the provider, implicitly validating LLM-CEG’s
design choice of local open-model fine-tuning.
4.3
Membership
Inference
Attack
Re-
search
Chen et al. [14] demonstrate that DP-SGD-trained
models exhibit sharper loss minima correlating with
residual MIA vulnerability.
LLM-CEG’s implicit
regularization finding — that DP noise flattens over-
fitting — may share a mechanistic relationship with
this loss-landscape perspective.
Li et al. [15] survey LLM privacy attacks, identifying
MIA as the most consistently demonstrable attack
class and noting that strong DP guarantees tend to
impose steep utility penalties — a tension that pre-
liminary results from LLM-CEG suggest may be em-
pirically resolvable under narrow fine-tuning condi-
tions, though further replication across larger models
and datasets is needed to confirm this finding.
4.4
Privacy-Utility Trade-Offs
Sun et al. [16] benchmark three privacy algo-
rithms across Mistral-7B, LLaMA2-7B, and Falcon-
7B, finding no dominant configuration across set-
tings. LLM-CEG’s finding that DP improves out-
of-distribution utility is an observation their bench-
mark is not designed to capture.
Ye and Luo [17] report that privacy-preserving
prompt transformations improve task performance
in some settings — structurally analogous to LLM-
CEG’s implicit regularization finding via a different
mechanism, suggesting this effect may be more gen-
eral than previously recognized.
4.5
Human-Centric Privacy Frameworks
A growing body of research argues that technically
rigorous DP guarantees are insufficient unless they
are legible, controllable, and meaningful to the peo-
ple whose data is at stake.
Li et al. [18] argue that LLM privacy research has
5

been predominantly model-centered.
LLM-CEG’s
controllable ε parameter responds to this critique:
clinicians and patients should be able to specify ac-
ceptable privacy risk rather than accepting system
defaults.
Staufer et al. [19] report from a user study of 458
participants that people want control over LLM-
generated associations,
reinforcing the need for
frameworks that report both formal ε and empiri-
cal MIA advantage.
Sun, Xu, and Gao [20] propose a Human-Centered
Privacy (HCP) framework integrating technical, eth-
ical, and regulatory dimensions across the full AI life-
cycle. LLM-CEG’s experimental pipeline constitutes
a technical instantiation of the HCP data-collection
and training stages.
Taylor, O’Dell, and Murphy [21] ground human-
centric AI in Ubuntu and maximum feasible partici-
pation, arguing that DP guarantees protect patients
mathematically but may not align with community
expectations — motivating LLM-SIED’s dissemina-
tion phase.
4.6
LLM Governance and Ethics
Das, Amini, and Wu [22] survey LLM vulnerabili-
ties with explicit focus on healthcare as a high-risk
deployment domain and call for domain-specific pri-
vacy guarantees accounting for the sensitivity gra-
dient of healthcare data.
LLM-CEG responds by
including diagnoses, medications, salaries, and SSNs
as distinct field types in its synthetic dataset.
4.7
Gaps Addressed by LLM-CEG
Five gaps in the literature motivate this work.
First, no existing framework provides an end-to-
end clinical PII pipeline combining DP training
with MIA evaluation.
Second, no multi-ε Pareto
analysis exists for causal language models report-
ing both formal and empirical privacy metrics to-
gether. Third, the DP-as-regularizer effect on nar-
row clinical fine-tuning datasets is previously undoc-
umented. Fourth, no Pareto visualization tool exists
for practitioner DP model selection. Fifth, a per-
sistent disconnect between technical DP guarantees
and human-centered privacy values remains unad-
dressed; LLM-CEG’s controllable ε and Pareto curve
bridge this gap by making the privacy-utility trade-
off empirically visible and negotiable.
5
Proposed Frameworks
5.1
LLM-CEG Algorithm
The LLM-CEG algorithm extends x-CEG to lan-
guage models as a systematic, iterative procedure.
Given a base LLM and a training corpus, it con-
verges on a privacy-audited model with a docu-
mented privacy-utility profile.
Algorithm 1 LLM-CEG: Privacy-Utility Optimiza-
tion for LLMs
Require: Base LLM M, corpus D, thresholds tp
(privacy), tu (utility)
Ensure: Audited model Mε with privacy report
1: Initialize ε ←ε0
2: repeat
3:
Fine-tune M on D via DP-SGD(ε) →Mε
4:
Run MIA; compute Adv = AccMIA −0.5
5:
if Adv > tp then
6:
Decrease ε; return to Step 2
7:
end if
8:
Evaluate utility (PPL or task accuracy)
9:
if Utility < tu then
10:
Increase ε; document trade-off
11:
end if
12: until Adv ≤tp AND Utility ≥tu
13: Publish Mε with Privacy Audit Report
5.2
LLM-SIED Framework
The SIED framework [1] is updated for LLM deploy-
ment as a four-phase engineering process. Phase 1
(Specifications) gathers privacy requirements: target
ε, data sensitivity categories, minimum acceptable
utility, and deployment mode. Phase 2 (Implemen-
tation) applies DP-SGD fine-tuning, data dedupli-
cation, and selective filtering. Phase 3 (Evaluation)
executes the LLM-CEG algorithm and documents
the ε–utility Pareto curve. Phase 4 (Dissemination)
releases the model with a Privacy Audit Report doc-
umenting (ε, δ), MIA attacker advantage, AUROC,
and utility benchmarks, directly addressing docu-
mentation requirements under the EU AI Act and
6

NIST AI RMF.
5.3
Experiment Workflow
Figure 2 provides a simplified view of the end-to-end
LLM-CEG workflow, from data generation through
iterative privacy-utility optimization to LLM-SIED
dissemination.
1. Generate synthetic PII data
?
2. Fine-tune baseline (no privacy)
?
3. Fine-tune with DP-SGD (ε ∈{8, 2, 0.5})
?
4. Run membership inference attack (MIA)
?
5. Measure utility (perplexity)
?
6. Privacy AND utility thresholds met?

-
No: adjust ε
?
Yes
7. LLM-SIED: publish with Audit Report
Figure 2:
Simplified LLM-CEG workflow.
Steps 3–6
form the iterative feedback loop: if thresholds are not
met, ε is adjusted and training repeats.
6
Experiments and Results
6.1
Experimental Setup
All
experiments
were
conducted
on
a
single
consumer-grade
CPU
machine
running
macOS
25.4.0 with Python 3.13.12, PyTorch 2.10.0, Hugging
Face Transformers 5.2.0, and Opacus 1.5.4. The base
model was DistilGPT-2, a distilled variant of GPT-
2 with 82 million parameters and six transformer
blocks. Code is available upon request.
6.2
Dataset
Synthetic patient records were generated using the
Faker library — an open-source Python package
that produces realistic but entirely fictitious per-
sonal data such as names, addresses, and medical
information. To ensure reproducibility, the random
number generator was initialized with a fixed seed
value of 42; this means any researcher running the
same script will generate an identical dataset, mak-
ing the experiment fully replicable without requiring
access to real patient records. Faker was used to sim-
ulate realistic PII in a clinical context without using
real patient data. Each record comprises six fields —
Name, Age, Diagnosis, Medication, Salary, and SSN
— serialized into natural-language sentences of the
form: “Patient Jennifer Walsh, aged 34, has been di-
agnosed with Type 2 Diabetes and is prescribed Met-
formin.”
A total of 500 records were partitioned
into a training member set (n = 300) and a held-out
non-member set (n = 200), strictly disjoint by con-
struction. A separate held-out general corpus of 50
diverse sentences with no clinical content served for
utility evaluation.
6.3
Models Trained
Table 2: Model configurations and privacy parameters
Model
Mechanism
ε
δ
Baseline
Standard SGD
—
—
DP ε=8
DP-SGD (Opacus)
8.0
10−5
DP ε=2
DP-SGD (Opacus)
2.0
10−5
DP ε=0.5
DP-SGD (Opacus)
0.5
10−5
All models were fine-tuned for 10 epochs, batch size
8, learning rate 5 × 10−5, AdamW optimizer, per-
sample gradient clipping with max-grad-norm=1.0.
Token and position embeddings were frozen prior
to Opacus wrapping to accommodate GPT-2’s tied-
weight architecture.
In Table 2, δ = 10−5 is the privacy failure proba-
bility: the small probability that the (ε, δ)-DP guar-
antee fails for any individual record.
Setting δ to
10−5 — well below 1/n where n = 300 is the train-
ing set size — is standard practice and ensures the
guarantee holds with overwhelming probability. The
AdamW optimizer is a variant of the Adam algo-
rithm that incorporates weight decay directly into
the update step, improving generalization during
fine-tuning of transformer-based models.
7

6.4
Training Dynamics
Table 3: Training loss per epoch (selected epochs)
Epoch
Baseline
DP ε=8
DP ε=2
DP ε=0.5
1
0.9994
8.8148
9.0557
9.1514
2
0.2884
7.8330
8.3819
8.7911
4
0.1898
5.6373
7.0787
8.1683
6
0.1650
3.5292
5.8086
7.5064
8
0.1585
1.8358
4.1974
6.8003
10
0.1514
1.0416
2.7881
6.0840
The baseline converged rapidly to 0.1514, indicat-
ing near-complete memorization. DP models, with
noise multipliers 0.6927, 1.3232, and 3.9062 for ε ∈
{8, 2, 0.5} respectively, show systematically attenu-
ated convergence proportional to the injected noise.
6.5
Membership
Inference
Attack
Re-
sults
Table 4: Loss-based MIA results across all models
Model
Loss Gap
MIA Acc.
Advantage
AUROC
Baseline
0.2995
85.8%
0.358
0.876
DP ε=8
0.0330
60.2%
0.102
0.515
DP ε=2
0.0328
60.4%
0.104
0.516
DP ε=0.5
0.0321
60.6%
0.106
0.513
The baseline is severely vulnerable:
an attacker
achieves 85.8% MIA accuracy with AUROC of 0.876,
exploiting a loss gap of 0.2995 nats between members
and non-members.
All three DP variants collapse
the loss gap by approximately 9× and reduce AU-
ROC to near 0.514 — barely above the 0.5 random-
chance floor.
Notably, all three DP models yield
nearly identical attack performance despite a 16-fold
range in ε (0.5 to 8.0), suggesting that once DP is ap-
plied at any of these levels, the memorization signal
is suppressed below the attack’s detection threshold.
6.6
Utility Evaluation
Table 5: Perplexity and normalized utility scores
Model
Mean PPL
Utility Score
Baseline
179.91
100.0%
DP ε=8
119.63
150.4%
DP ε=2
121.27
148.3%
DP ε=0.5
121.97
147.5%
Table 5 presents perplexity scores on a held-out
general-purpose corpus of 50 diverse sentences with
no clinical content.
Counter-intuitively, all three
DP-trained models substantially outperform the
non-private baseline: mean perplexity drops from
179.91 (baseline) to the 119–122 range across all DP
configurations, corresponding to normalized utility
scores of 147.5–150.4% relative to baseline. This in-
dicates that DP-trained models retain significantly
better general language ability than the baseline
model, which overfitted to the narrow clinical train-
ing distribution. The utility scores are nearly iden-
tical across the three ε values, reinforcing the earlier
MIA finding that privacy strength has minimal im-
pact on model quality once DP is applied.
6.7
Novel Finding: DP as Implicit Regu-
larization
Counter-intuitively, all three DP models achieve
lower perplexity on out-of-distribution general text
than the baseline, yielding utility scores of 147.5–
150.4%.
The mechanism is as follows: the base-
line model rapidly overfitted the narrow, repetitive
distribution of 300 short patient-record sentences,
degrading its general language ability (perplexity
179.91). DP noise, functioning analogously to weight
decay or dropout [7,8], prevented the model from col-
lapsing entirely onto the training distribution, pre-
serving the broader representational knowledge in-
herited from the pre-trained DistilGPT-2 checkpoint
(perplexity 119–122 on general text).
This finding extends prior observations by Ye and
Luo [17] and aligns with theoretical generalization
bounds linking DP to uniform stability [7, 8].
Its
practical message is direct: protecting privacy and
maintaining model utility are not necessarily in con-
flict. Under conditions of narrow fine-tuning data
— common in clinical, legal, and enterprise settings
— differential privacy can simultaneously improve
both.
6.8
Privacy-Utility Pareto Analysis
Figure 3 captures the central message of this pa-
per.
The crossing of the two lines — privacy im-
proving while utility simultaneously increases at the
Baseline-to-DP transition — is the empirical signa-
8

Figure 3: LLM-CEG Privacy-Utility Pareto Curve. Red
line (left axis): MIA attacker advantage (lower is more
private). Blue line (right axis): normalized utility score
(higher is better). Green region: LLM-CEG acceptable
operating zone (advantage ≤0.10). All three DP models
satisfy the privacy threshold while exceeding the 100%
utility baseline. DP ε=8 is the Pareto-optimal configura-
tion.
ture of differential privacy acting as implicit regu-
larization. All three DP models land squarely in the
green acceptable zone. The Pareto-optimal config-
uration is DP ε=8: it achieves the same empirical
privacy protection as the strongest setting (ε=0.5)
while preserving the highest utility.
6.9
Full Results Summary
Table 6: Complete results across all models
Model
Loss
Advantage
AUROC
PPL
Utility
Baseline
0.1514
0.358
0.876
179.91
100.0%
DP ε=8
1.0416
0.102
0.515
119.63
150.4%
DP ε=2
2.7881
0.104
0.516
121.27
148.3%
DP ε=0.5
6.0840
0.106
0.513
121.97
147.5%
Table 6 consolidates all evaluation metrics across
the four model configurations. Reading across the
columns, the non-private baseline achieves a very low
training loss (0.1514) — indicative of near-complete
memorization — but correspondingly high MIA vul-
nerability (advantage 0.358, AUROC 0.876) and
poor general-text perplexity (179.91). The three DP
variants present a markedly different profile: train-
ing loss is higher (reflecting the noise-induced learn-
ing constraint), yet MIA attacker advantage col-
lapses to 0.102–0.106 and AUROC drops to approx-
imately 0.513–0.516, barely above the 0.5 random-
chance floor. Crucially, perplexity improves to 119–
122 across all DP models, yielding utility scores 47–
50% above the baseline. Taken together, these re-
sults indicate that DP training simultaneously re-
duces privacy leakage and improves generalization,
with the ε=8 configuration representing the Pareto-
optimal operating point: it achieves the same empir-
ical privacy protection as the strictest setting while
preserving the highest utility.
7
Discussion
7.1
LLM-CEG Validation
The results validate the core LLM-CEG hypothesis:
controllable ε guarantees embedded into LLM fine-
tuning pipelines can simultaneously reduce empirical
privacy risk and improve model utility. The frame-
work’s iterative feedback loop converges to a well-
defined Pareto-optimal operating point, providing
practitioners with a concrete, reproducible method
for selecting a deployment configuration rather than
relying on formal ε values alone.
7.2
Human-Centric
Implications
and
Trust
The human-centric privacy literature [18,19,21] con-
sistently argues that mathematical DP guarantees
must be legible and controllable to the people whose
data is at stake, not only to technical specialists.
LLM-CEG’s Pareto curve provides exactly this: a vi-
sual instrument that translates abstract ε values into
empirically measured consequences that a clinician,
CISO, patient advocate, or regulator can interpret
and act on.
The finding that ε=8.0 provides essentially identi-
cal empirical protection to ε=0.5 while preserving
50% more model utility is an actionable insight that
purely formal DP reporting cannot provide. This has
direct implications for AI adoption strategy: when
organizational stakeholders can see that privacy pro-
tection is strong, measurable, and does not come at
the cost of system usefulness, the barrier to deploy-
ing privacy-preserving AI is substantially lowered.
Trust is not built through mathematical proofs alone
— it is built through transparency, empirical evi-
dence, and tools that make risk visible and nego-
tiable.
9

7.3
Limitations and Future Work
LLM-CEG is a heuristic gauge, not a formal proof
of privacy; MIA success rates are empirical upper
bounds, not tight theoretical guarantees. The cur-
rent prototype uses DistilGPT-2 on 500 synthetic
records. Future work includes scaling to larger mod-
els on real clinical data; integrating LoRA-based
parameter-efficient fine-tuning with DP [11]; incor-
porating the loss-landscape perspective of Chen et
al. [14]; and developing the participatory governance
frameworks called for by Taylor et al. [21] to en-
sure LLM-SIED’s dissemination phase aligns with
community-level expectations of medical data stew-
ardship.
8
Conclusion
This
paper
presented
LLM-CEG,
a
systematic
framework extending a decade of data privacy re-
search to the most consequential AI privacy chal-
lenge of the current era: language model memoriza-
tion of sensitive training data. On a single consumer-
grade CPU machine, we demonstrated that DP-
SGD reduces MIA attacker advantage by 71.5%
while simultaneously improving out-of-distribution
utility by 47–50%, establishing that the privacy-
utility trade-off in fine-tuned LLMs is not always
zero-sum under narrow fine-tuning conditions.
The literature review identified five specific gaps the
framework addresses, including the first end-to-end
clinical PII pipeline combining DP training with
MIA evaluation, and the novel finding that differen-
tial privacy can act as implicit regularization. The
LLM-SIED engineering process provides organiza-
tions with a repeatable, auditable path to privacy-
compliant LLM deployment aligned with the EU AI
Act and the NIST AI RMF.
The broader message is one of possibility: protecting
sensitive data and building useful, trustworthy AI
systems are not mutually exclusive goals. With sys-
tematic frameworks like LLM-CEG and LLM-SIED,
organizations can demonstrate measurable privacy
protection, communicate risk transparently to all
stakeholders, and build the foundation of trust that
responsible AI adoption requires.