Scalable Secure Biometric Authentication without
Auxiliary Identifiers
Alexander Bienstock1, Daniel Escudero∗,1,
Antigoni Polychroniadou1, Zhen Zeng1, Pranav Bhat1,
Ashok Singal1, Prashant Sharma1, Manuela Veloso1
1JPMorganChase, New York, NY, USA.
Abstract
The prevalence of biometric authentication has been on the rise due to its ease of
use and elimination of weak passwords. To date, most biometric authentication
systems have been designed for on-device authentication of the device owner (e.g.,
smartphones and laptops). Recently, biometric authentication systems have started
to emerge that are designed to authenticate users against cloud databases storing
representations of biometrics for large numbers of users (potentially millions),
such as those facilitating biometric payments. However, the use of a large cloud
database introduces a significant attack vector, as a breach of the database could
lead to the compromise of all enrolled users’ sensitive biometric data. Indeed, all
such existing systems either do not adequately protect against such a breach,
or are impractical to deploy and use due to their high computational overhead.
In this work, we present a new biometric authentication system that provides
provable security guarantees against data breaches, while remaining scalable and
performant. To do so, we marry artificial intelligence with advanced cryptographic
techniques in a novel fashion, providing several optimizations along the way. Our
work is the first to show that real-world scalable privacy-preserving biometric
authentication without auxiliary identifiers is feasible, and we believe that it will
spur widespread industrial adoption and further research in this area.
1 Introduction
Biometrics are becoming an increasingly popular method for user authentication,
providing the means to unlock smartphones1, access secure facilities2, board planes3,
∗Work done while at JPMorganChase. D.E. is now at TACEO.
1
arXiv:2604.25071v1 [cs.CR] 27 Apr 2026

and more. In such systems, a user is first enrolled by providing a biometric, and
thereafter that same biometric (and sometimes only that biometric, without any
auxiliary information) is used to authenticate the user. Some examples of biometric
modalities include face images, iris scans, fingerprints, palmprints, and more.
Biometric authentication will soon see expanded use-cases, including those where
the biometric data of potentially hundreds of thousands (or millions) of users must be
stored in a cloud database, rather than locally on some device. Such use-cases include
biometric-based payment systems4, which is being pushed as the payment method
of the future by Amazon5 and JPMorgan6; fraud prevention via ensuring biometric
uniqueness across accounts in a system (e.g., banking accounts); biometric access to
cloud services7; and more. However, the storage of large amounts of biometric data
on a cloud server in these settings raises significant security and privacy concerns.
Indeed, even some of the world’s most mature and trusted software companies are
susceptible to data breaches8, and biometric data is particularly sensitive since it is
immutable and uniquely tied to an individual. To give an illustrative example, if a
person’s credit card information is stolen, they can cancel the card and get a new one;
if their biometric data is stolen, they cannot change something about their biology.
Once biometric data is compromised by an adversary, this adversary may try to
recreate a physical copy of the biometric (for example, a fake fingerprint) in order to
impersonate the victim. However, this complex physical effort may not be needed; the
adversary may be able to bypass the physical biometric scanner entirely and instead
infiltrate the system past the point of physical scanning, using the stolen biometric at
that point. Moreover, since biometric data is soon to be used for financial transactions
and other important services, the stakes are extremely high. Beyond general privacy
concerns, identity theft, fraud, surveillance, and other malicious activities are all
potential risks if biometric data is not properly protected. Furthermore, for companies
offering biometric authentication services commercially, a data breach could lead to
significant legal liability, reputational damage, and loss of customer trust9,10. Therefore,
ensuring the security of biometric authentication systems is of paramount importance.
A pipeline for processing biometric data typically involves converting the biometric
into a so-called template, which is a mathematical representation of the biometric that
is suitable for storage and comparison. While some organizations claim that simply
storing templates in the cloud database is secure enough, there are numerous works
demonstrating that templates can be inverted to recover the original biometric data11–13
(see right side of Figure 1), and thus more work is needed. Indeed, experts warn against
the breach of biometric data from such systems, including that of Amazon14.
There are some prior works that provide provably secure biometric authenti-
cation techniques. First, some works use advanced cryptographic primitives like
Fully-Homomorphic Encryption and Secure Multiparty Computation, which allow to
perform the authentication process while the biometric data remains encrypted15–19.
However, these techniques all require some secret information to recover the result of
the authentication, and this secret information must be stored somewhere. The server
storing the secret information can just as easily be compromised, leading to the same
issues as before. Additionally, these solutions are often impractical due to their high
computational overhead20.
2

Figure 1: System architecture for our secure biometric authentication system. Tem-
plates computed from a neural network based on biometric scans are cryptographically
hashed before being stored in the database, which hides all information about the
biometric data. These stored hashes are matched against for authentication. Previous
solutions stored templates in the clear in the database, which can be inverted to re-
cover original biometric data in the case of a data breach.
Another line of work uses fuzzy extractors 21–24 to derive a strong cryptographic
key from a biometric template, which is then used for authentication. Although there
is no need for a secret key to be stored on the server, fuzzy extractors are only used
for one-to-one verification of a user, in which the identity of the user is already known,
explicitly through auxiliary user identifiers or implicitly through device ownership,
and the purpose of the system is to verify the users’s claimed identity. A richer
functionality that is required in many applications is one-to-many identification, in
which the identity of the user is not a priori known, and instead needs to be successfully
determined from a large database of enrolled users, without any auxiliary identifiers.
Fuzzy extractors do not natively support this richer functionality. Indeed, if a user
only presents a biometric, and not any other identifier, then a fuzzy extractor-based
system must search through the entire large database of enrolled users one-by-one to
find a match, which is computationally infeasible.
In our work, we present a new biometric authentication system that addresses the
above challenges. See Figure 1 for an overview of our system architecture. Our system
enables for the first time accurate, secure biometric authentication using a cloud
database, without the need to store sensitive information on the server. It supports
real-time one-to-many identification with authentication time that scales independently
of the number of enrolled users. It additionally provides for the first time an important
property called revocability, which ensures that users can revoke their enrollment in
the database in a way that guarantees their previously-enrolled biometric information
cannot again be used by anyone, even if there was/is a prior/future database leak.
Our solution works for all biometric modalities, however we focus on face images in
our experiments due to the availability of large-scale public datasets (and lack thereof
for other modalities). We leverage advanced cryptographic techniques to ensure the
privacy and security of biometric data throughout the lifetime of the system, while also
3

ensuring practicality for real-world use cases. The properties achieved by our system
in comparison to previous practical systems are listed in Table 1.
Encryption in
Storage/Computation
Authentication Time
Revocability
Existing Practical Systems
No
O(N)
No
Our Secure System
Yes
O(1)
Yes
Table 1: Comparison of our secure biometric authentication system with existing
practical systems. N is the number of enrolled users. Our system encrypts biometric
data at all times, has authentication time independent of number of enrollees, and
provides revocability (defined above), while existing practical systems do not have any
of these properties.
2 System Architecture and Threat Model
We now overview the architecture of our system (depicted in Figure 1), along with the
threat model. A more formal model is presented in Appendix A. Our system consists
of two types of devices: scanners that capture biometric data from users, and a remote
database that receives information extracted from the biometric from the scanner,
stores it and determines if authentication was successful.
During the enrollment phase, a user registers their biometric data in the system,
in order to authenticate at some later point, using the same biometric. The system
stores some derivation of their biometric data associated with their identity in the
database, alongside the (processed) data of all other users of the system. Then, during
the authentication phase, a user attempts to authenticate with the system using their
biometric data. The system checks whether the biometric data corresponds to a user
in the database, and if so, returns the user’s identity.
From a functionality standpoint, we naturally only want enrolled users to be able to
successfully authenticate as themselves. For security, we assume that the scanners are
trusted devices that securely capture biometric data and send extracted information
to the database over an encrypted channel. In practice, the scanners immediately
delete any data derived from the biometrics and would be fortified with anti-tampering
measures25,26, liveness detection26, and other security features to prevent adversarial
manipulation. On the other hand, the remote database may be compromised, and our
goal is to ensure that even if an adversary gains access to the database, they cannot
learn any sensitive information about enrolled users’ biometrics.
Entropy Assumption.
A primary assumption underlying secure biometric authentication systems is that
biometric data is sufficiently random; i.e., has high entropy. Indeed, if biometric
data was not very random, then an adversary could easily learn the distribution of
biometric data, and simply sample likely biometric values until they find one that
4

Figure 2: Pictorial, simplified overview of our secure biometric authentication protocol.
During enrollment, the system cryptographically hashes all possible templates around
the user’s enrollment template (centered and faded) using CH and stores these hash
values in the database, paired with the user’s identity (represented by color). During
authentication, the system hashes the authentication template and checks if the
resulting hash value matches any of the stored hash values for any user. Note that all
hashed values stored in the database are randomly scattered throughout the space,
depicting the security of the system.
successfully authenticates as some enrolled user. As explained in the Introduction, the
adversary need not physically recreate the biometric, but could instead bypass the
physical biometric scanner and infiltrate the system past that point, using the sampled
biometric. Fortunately, prior works have provided empirical evidence that biometric
data does indeed have high entropy23,27, and in Section 5.2 we provide further empirical
validation of this assumption for our specific system instantiation. In our system, we
will in fact rely on this assumption of intrinsic randomness of biometrics to actually
protect information about the biometric itself (see the next section and Appendix A).1
3 Protocol Overview
Here, we provide a general overview of our system. We start with the baseline one-to-
one sample-then-lock fuzzy extractor of Canetti et al.22 (improved upon by Shukla et
al.23) and with novel techniques, extend it to the one-to-many authentication setting
we aim to achieve in this work. In Appendix B, we provide a formal specification of
our protocol and in Appendix C we provide a security proof for our protocol.
Our system critically relies on a base templatization model that extracts a high-
dimensional, real-valued template (or embedding) from a given biometric scan. This
model ensures that templates extracted from biometrics of the same person are close,
1Indeed, we can tune the amount of entropy captured by our system, and thus the security of our system.
5

while templates extracted from different people are far, both in terms of euclidean
distance (which is closely related to cosine similarity).
In addition, we require a cryptographic hash function, CH, approved by the National
Institutes of Standards and Technology, such as SHA-328, that maps bit strings to bit
strings. The main property of a cryptographic hash function that we utilize is that
if the input is sufficiently random (i.e., has high entropy), then the output will look
random, and it will be computationally infeasible to recover any information about
the input from the output. Cryptographic hash functions are deterministic, meaning
that the same input will always yield the same output.
With these two building blocks, we can provide the simplified intuition of our
system, depicted pictorially in Figure 2. The templatization model gives the property
that all possible authentication templates for a given user will be closely centered
around their enrollment template, and far away from the possible templates of all other
users. Thus, we can cryptographically hash all possible templates around each users’
enrollment template, and store these hash values, paired with the user’s identity, in the
database.2 Then, during authentication, we can hash the authentication template and
check if the resulting hash value matches any of the stored hash values for any user.
Correctness is achieved, since from above, this authentication hash value will match
only one of the hashes stored in the database that we computed during enrollment
for that user, and not any other user. Moreover, we achieve security assuming that
biometric data has high entropy, since we only store outputs of the cryptographic hash
function in the database.
Below, we introduce the system in more detail. To bridge the gap between the
real-valued templates and the discrete inputs of cryptographic hash functions, we also
utilize a locality-sensitive hash (LSH). An LSH maps templates into bit strings, such
that the output bit strings of two close templates are close in hamming distance (i.e.,
the number of bits where the strings differ), and two far templates result in bit strings
that are far in hamming distance.
Global Setup.
The system starts with some global setup. We denote the output length of the LSH as n.
Additionally, let 0 < k < n and m > 0 be some other system parameters. The system
will first generate m length-k subsets of [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n}, denoted µ1, µ2, . . . , µm. An
example for how to generate such subsets is just uniformly random and independently;
see other methods in Section 4.3. We will also use t := n −k to denote the number of
elements of [n] that we exclude from each subset µi.
Enrollment Phase.
We now provide a more detailed description of the enrollment phase, demonstrated
in the top of Figure 3. After capturing the user’s biometric data, the system runs it
through the templatization model to obtain a template. Next, this template is run
through the LSH to obtain a bit string of length-n, v := (v1, . . . , vn), where each
vi ∈{0, 1}. With v in hand, the system next computes all length-k substrings of v
corresponding to µ1, µ2, . . . , µm generated during the global setup phase. We denote
2Our final system performs this step in a more nuanced, efficient way.
6

Figure 3: More detailed overview of our secure biometric authentication protocol,
demonstrating the cryptographically hashed values of bit substrings that are stored in
the database during enrollment (top) and against which authentication is performed
(bottom). In this example, we have m = 3, n = 9, and k = 7 (thus t = 2). Since LSH
output strings of the same user are close and LSH output strings of different users are
far, the cryptographically hashed values of substrings will only match for same users,
ensuring correctness.
these resulting substrings as w1, w2, . . . , wm. Finally, the system cryptographically
hashes each wi using CH to obtain a hash value hi := CH(wi) and stores these hash
values h1, . . . , hm in a database, DB, under the user’s identity, ID. This database is a
hash table, where the keys are the hash values and the values are the user identities;
i.e. (k, v) := (h, ID). Such a hash table allows for constant-time lookups of keys (i.e.,
hash values).
Authentication Phase.
Authentication follows a similar pattern to enrollment, presented in the bottom of
Figure 3. Indeed, authentication starts in the same way, by capturing the biometric, run-
ning it through the templatization model and LSH, obtaining substrings w1, w2, . . . , wm
according to global subsets µ1, µ2, . . . , µm, and hashing each substring to obtain hash
values h1, h2, . . . , hm. Then, instead of storing the hashes as in enrollment, the system
performs a lookup (in constant time) on each obtained hash hi, within the database. If
the system finds a number of matching hashes for some identity ID that is greater than
some threshold τ, it returns ID; otherwise, it returns ⊥to indicate that authentication
has failed.
7

Correctness.
For the same person, the templatization model and LSH guarantee that different
biometric scans result in bit strings v and v′ that are close to each other, with high
probability. As a result, Canetti et al.22 observed that some number of the m substrings
w of v will match the corresponding substrings w′ of v′, with high probability. Thus,
with high probability, there will be enough hashed values during authentication time
that match with the given user’s enrolled hashes. On the other hand, for different
people, since the templatization model and LSH guarantee that their corresponding
biometric scans will result in bit strings v and v′ that are far apart, very few (if any)
of the substrings of v will exactly match any of the m substrings of v′, with high
probability. Therefore, with high probability, not enough hashed value matches will
be found during authentication time, and thus the system does not allow incorrect
authentication. See Section 5.2 for experimental verification of these phenomena.
Security.
Security comes from our assumption that biometric data has high entropy. Indeed, if
this is the case, and the parameters of the templatization model, LSH, and substring
length k are chosen appropriately, then each resulting bit string wi will also have
high entropy. Therefore, the cryptographic hash function will output random-looking
hash values hi, that cannot be used to recover information about the original hashed
substrings vi (nor the original biometric data or template). In Section 5.2 we empirically
validate these assumptions by employing standard entropy estimation23,27 to show
that the hashed substrings indeed have high entropy.
4 Concrete System Instantiation
In this section, we give concrete instantiations of the abstracted components of our
high-level protocol from the previous section.
4.1 Templatization Model
For our templatization model, we use Arcface29 with 1024-dimensional templates.
Arcface adds additive angular margin loss to the loss function to maximize class
separability, while pushing members of the same class closer together. This increases
accuracy on facial recognition tasks and intuitively also increases the amount of entropy
that our system can capture. Indeed, if templates for different identities are more
separated and those for the same identity are closer together in euclidean space, this
will translate to the corresponding LSH outputs having higher hamming distance and
lower hamming distance for different and same identities, respectively. Thus, longer
substrings of these outputs will be much less likely to collide between different identities,
while for the same identity, the likelihood of collision will remain high. Therefore, we
can sample longer substrings and thus capture more entropy in each of these substrings,
while maintaining low error rates.
8

4.2 Locality-Sensitive Hash Function
For the LSH, we use the state-of-the-art OrthoHash30 with 4096-bit outputs. Orthohash
is based on deep hashing—i.e., deep learning techniques, followed by some binarization
process—instead of traditional statistical techniques like random projections. The
objective function used in OrthoHash simultaneously results in discriminative outputs,
i.e., intra-class distances are small while inter-class distances are large, and also
minimizes the quantization error from binarizing the continuous outputs.
4.3 Subset Generation
For the generation of subsets, we use ζ-sampling from Shukla et al.23. Instead of using
the naive approach of sampling each bit uniformly at random for each substring, ζ-
sampling weights the bits according to some measure. While, Shukla et al. examine a
few different such measures, we focus on a mutual-information based approach, which
intuitively measures how much each bit in the LSH output reduces the uncertainty
about the identity of the biometric:
mii := I(biti; ID) = H(ID) −H(ID|biti),
where H is the entropy function, biti is a random variable representing the value of
bit i, and ID is a random variable representing the identity of the biometric. Then, the
sampling weight wti of each bit biti is proportional to this mutual information value,
potentially further weighted by some value ζ:
wti :=
miζ
i
P
j miζ
j
.
This mutual-information based approach simultaneously increases accuracy (as bits
that are more informative about the identity are more likely to be sampled) and also
increases the entropy captured in each substring (as bits that are more discriminative
are more likely to be sampled, and thus the length of substrings can be longer).
5 Evaluation
Now we provide empirical evaluation of our system, showing that it is efficient, accurate,
and secure.
5.1 Evaluation Dataset
Due to the lack of available large-scale public datasets of high-quality face images
with multiple images per identity, we use synthetic face images generated by the GAN-
Control library31. This library allows us to generate multiple realistic images of the
same synthetic identity with control over facial expressions, lighting conditions, head
poses, etc. We generate two images each for approximately 100,000 synthetic identities.
See Figure 4 for examples of synthetic images used in our experiments.
9

Random Expressions
ID 1
ID 2
ID 3
ID 4
ID 5
Similar Expressions
ID 1
ID 2
ID 3
ID 4
ID 5
Figure 4: Comparison of random expressions (top) and fixed expressions (bottom)
for 5 different identities. Each ID shows two images side by side.
5.2 Experimental Results
We now present the experimental results for our system, first explaining the insecure
baseline we use for comparison, then describing the different types of experiments
we run, and finally discussing the results of these experiments, including accuracy,
computational efficiency, and entropy estimation.
Insecure Baseline.
This insecure baseline simply stores the output of the ArcFace templatization model
on the enrollment image of every identity, then during authentication, computes the
euclidean distance between the template of the authentication image and the stored
template for each enrolled identity, and authenticates if the distance is below some
threshold.
Experiment Types.
We run experiments on two sets of data: (i) face images with different random ex-
pressions for each identity used during enrollment and authentication, and (ii) face
images with two similar expressions for each identity used during enrollment and au-
thentication, with the two expression styles fixed across identities. See Figure 4 for
examples of these two sets of data. While (i) is a more challenging and realistic setting,
publicly available templatization models are vastly inferior to (closed-source) indus-
trial solutions32. Moreover, as discussed earlier, the better the model is at separating
the distance between same biometrics and different biometrics, the more entropy our
system can capture, and thus the more secure it is. Therefore, we use (ii) to come
closer to matching the accuracy of industry models, and thus to show that our system
can achieve very low error rates while also capturing a meaningful amount of entropy,
which is crucial for security. We still use (i) to empirically estimate the additional error
that our secure system incurs compared to the insecure baseline of ArcFace, and to
show that even in this more challenging setting, the error increase is not too large.
In both settings, we evaluate the standard measures of False Negative Rate (FNR)
and False Positive Rate (FPR). FNR is the rate at which enrolled identities do not
10

properly authenticate as themselves; FPR is the rate at which non-enrolled identities
improperly authenticate as someone in the enrolled database. We will also refer to
generic accuracy, for which we use the average of FNR and FPR as the error rate.
Experiments with Random Expressions.
We start by running experiments on synthetic faces generated with random expressions
(top of Figure 4). As Extended Data Figure 1 shows, the parameters of our system
that yield the lowest error results in a ≲1.5× increase in the error rate compared
to the baseline insecure version; this means that if the baseline insecure system has
99.9% accuracy, our system will have ≈99.85% accuracy. Unfortunately, as mentioned
earlier, the accuracy of even the baseline insecure system based on arcface for faces
with random expressions is quite low. Moreover, as a side effect, the difference between
distances of same and different identities is not large, and thus the length of substrings
and entropy captured at this accuracy is quite low (as explained above). This low
accuracy of the baseline system is due to a number of reasons, most notably due to the
lack of large high-quality public datasets of face images needed for successful training;
it is known that industry models are able to achieve much better accuracy as high as
≈99.95% for databases of size 12 million32.
Remedy for Low Captured Entropy.
We propose a remedy to the above low entropy issue. Indeed, although the length of the
substrings and thus the entropy captured is low, if we sample a random cryptographic
key and use it as input to a (also deterministic) Pseudo-Random Function (PRF)33 to
generate the outputs instead of a cryptographic hash function, then the outputs will be
computationally indistinguishable from random, as long as the key remains secret. One
way to keep the key secret is to store it in a Trusted Execution Environment34, which
is a secure environment isolated that is inaccessible from the rest of a server’s operating
system, and have all PRF computations happen inside this secure environment. Thus,
our security objective can still be achieved, albeit under a different assumption that
the PRF key cannot be retrieved from the TEE.
Experiments with Similar Expressions.
To come closer to matching the accuracy of industry models, we run experiments
on synthetic faces with fixed, similar expressions (bottom of Figure 4). As shown in
Figure 5 (left), our secure system can achieve very low error rates in this setting, across
database sizes. Indeed, even for substring lengths up to 110 bits, we maintain very
low and performant error rates. As we increase the substring length, increasing the
security of the system, we see a gradual increase in only false negatives, but the system
remains largely performant.
Computational Efficiency.
We now discuss computational efficiency of our system. First, for storage per identity,
our sytem involves storing m key-value pairs, where the key is a hash value and the
value is the identity of the user. The hash value length we use is the standard 256 bits
and we use 32-bit integers to represent identities. Thus, the total storage per identity
11

Figure 5: Left. Error rates for databases of size 1,000, 10,000, and 100,000 enrolled
IDs. FNR: False negative rate; FPR: False Positive Rate. False negatives are calculated
over first 1000 enrolled identities. False positives are calculated over 1000 non-enrolled
identities. Runs of our secure system are averaged over 5 trials. Right. Average time
per user for enrollment and authentication queries; both secure (solid) and insecure
(dashed, faded).
is m · (256 + 32) bits. We use m = 250K for the experiments in Figure 5 (left), which
results in a storage of ≈9 MB per identity, which is quite reasonable for modern
servers. However, due to memory constraints, we recommend sharding the database so
that each shard contains the (hash value, identity) pairs for at most 10K identities.
Authentication queries would be processed by each shard in parallel, whose results
would be processed together by an authentication server.
With this in mind, in Figure 5 (right) we present the average time per user for both
enrollment and authentication queries, for database sizes up to 10K. Both enrollment
and queries take under 1 second for all database sizes and queries take as little as 680
milliseconds for database size of 1K. We note that even though in theory, enrollment and
query time should be fixed across database sizes, since we are only performing constant-
time hash table operations, both actually slightly increase with larger databases. This
is because as the enrollment database grows, the hash table used for storing and
looking up biometric templates becomes larger, leading to increased CPU cache misses
during dictionary lookups, and therefore slower main memory fetches. Compared to
the insecure baseline, our system maintains competitive enrollment and query times.
Entropy Estimation.
Measuring the true entropy of samples from a distribution requires an exponentially
large number of samples35,36. However, there are established methods for estimating
the min-entropy of biometrics in the literature. To estimate the min-entropy of the
substrings that we hash in our system, we use the standard method of Shukla et al.23,
which is a modification of Daugman’s test27. This estimation involves computations
on the mean, µUnlike, and standard deviation, σUnlike, of pairwise Hamming distances
between the substrings of different identities in the dataset:
e = −µUnlike(1 −µUnlike) log max{µUnlike, 1 −µUnlike}
σ2
Unlike
.
12

In Extended Data Table 1, we show that the minimum (most important for security
guarantees) of estimates of min-entropy for all substrings is quite high, reaching 74.3
bits of entropy for substring lengths of 110 bits, which is a very meaningful level
of security. We also provide the mean and maximum estimates across substrings for
reference.
Disclaimer
This paper was prepared for informational purposes by the Artificial Intelligence
Research group of JPMorgan Chase & Co. and its affiliates (“JP Morgan”) and is not a
product of the Research Department of JP Morgan. JP Morgan makes no representation
and warranty whatsoever and disclaims all liability, for the completeness, accuracy
or reliability of the information contained herein. This document is not intended as
investment research or investment advice, or a recommendation, offer or solicitation for
the purchase or sale of any security, financial instrument, financial product or service,
or to be used in any way for evaluating the merits of participating in any transaction,
and shall not constitute a solicitation under any jurisdiction or to any person, if such
solicitation under such jurisdiction or to such person would be unlawful.