Process-Mining of Hypertraces: Enabling Scalable
Formal Security Verification of (Automotive)
Network Architectures
Julius Figge 1,2, David Knuplesch2, Andreas Maletti1, and Dragan Zuvic2
1 Institute of Computer Science, Leipzig University, 04109 Leipzig, Germany
{julius.figge,andreas.maletti}@uni-leipzig.de
2 Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation GmbH, 89081 Ulm, Germany
{julius.figge,david.knuplesch,dragan.zuvic}@mercedes-benz.com
Abstract. The automotive domain is transitioning: vehicles act as rolling
servers, persistently connected to numerous external entities. This con-
nectivity, combined with rising on-board computing power for advanced
driver assistance systems and similar use cases, creates escalating chal-
lenges for securing automotive network architectures. This work advances
the security analysis of internet-connected automotive network architec-
tures and their protocols. We introduce a strong, active adversary model
tailored to the automotive domain. We substantially extend security pro-
tocol verification possible based on Attack Resilience Hyperproperties
(ARHs) by introducing a verification-orchestration algorithm. Further-
more, we provide methods for comparative attribution of security prop-
erty invalidations to specific, fine-grained component compromises. We
present a novel integration of formal verification and process mining.
By utilizing ARH counterexample traces for process mining, we system-
atically identify and aggregate attacker behavior that causes security
property invalidations. This pipeline enables in-depth understanding of
root causes and attack paths leading to protocol-security invalidations.
We demonstrate real-world applicability through a prototype and case
study on the secure transmission of battery management system data
within an automotive network architecture.
Keywords: Formal Verification · Hyperproperties · Process Mining ·
Automotive Security · Network Architectures
1
Introduction
Automotive vehicles are undergoing a major transformation [15], with the emer-
gence of software-defined vehicles [2] and ubiquitous connectivity to external
entities, e.g. mandatory over-the-air updates [24], becoming the norm. Vehicles
are evolving into rolling datacenters with high-performance compute units using
hypervisors and virtual machines [27, 12], increasingly exposing them to broader
cybersecurity challenges, including e.g. the shift to post-quantum cryptogra-
phy [17] and required hardening against (remote) compromise. These challenges
arXiv:2604.21606v1 [cs.CR] 23 Apr 2026

2
J. Figge et al.
are compounded by regulation, including UN Regulation No. R156 (over-the-air
updates), UN Regulation No. R155 (cybersecurity and software update manage-
ment systems), and ISO/SAE 21434 (Road vehicles – Cybersecurity engineer-
ing) [25, 20]. In parallel, vehicle functionality advances through systems such
as advanced driver assistance system (ADAS) and battery-electric platforms,
introducing further safety challenges that necessitate security.
Motivation and Research Gap Component compromise in the automotive
domain is expected; its occurrence is a matter of when, not if [14, 26]. This mo-
tivates the comprehensive analysis of automotive network architectures (ANAs)
security under (partial) compromise as required by automotive regulations (e.g.,
ISO 21434) [20]. Formal verification is well suited to prove the conditions under
which security properties (SPs) of protocols in ANAs become invalid.
Simultaneously, research gaps remain in formal verification (FV) capabilities re-
quired to analyse ANAs. In particular, a comprehensive view is lacking, which
would allow assessing the impact of different possible partial compromises. State-
space explosion limits comprehensive granularity, because of the trade-off be-
tween detail and analysis complexity. Thus, FV focuses on refuting the examined
SPs [6], yielding only isolated compromise scenarios as counterexamples. This
e.g. hinders comparative analyses of compromise impacts on SP validity and the
verification of fine-grained permission models.
We previously investigated these security challenges in ANAs [8, 9]. In particu-
lar, with Attack Resilience Hyperproperties (ARHs) [9], we provide a systematic
method to analyze protocol SPs invalidation. Grounded in security-protocol ver-
ification, ARHs are hyperproperties (HPs) that attribute SP’s invalidation to
protocol components (e.g., control units and network domains). For instance,
they permit the identification of components that are necessary for the invalida-
tion of a given SP, but are not sufficient when considered in isolation. Despite
these strengths, the above research gaps remain for ARHs, but some are ad-
dressable. However, their foundational approach imposes a conceptual limitation:
ARH analysis answers “who” is responsible for invalidation but not “how” adver-
sarial behavior invalidates a protocol’s SPs. These ARH limitations should be
addressed by developing a method to synthesize comprehensive SPs invalidating
attacker behaviors. This is especially relevant since HP-based attribution ob-
scures the underlying counterexample-traces, which renders the manual analysis
of many traces, which is required to understand the possible attacker behavior,
impractical.
Research Questions Our research questions RQ1-RQ5 delineate this contri-
bution’s scope and limits and explicitly address the identified research gap.
To reflect automotive architectural specifics and attacker’s operating conditions,
we must define a suitable attacker model (RQ1) that captures adversarial be-
havior, which is observed in the automotive domain, while not being limited
to it. Current ARH analysis is constrained by state-space explosion. To advance
the state of art and ensure practical applicability, we devise algorithmic improve-

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
3
ments that reduce the number of scenarios to analyze (RQ2). With respect to
the current capabilities of ARH analysis, it is desirable to enhance granularity by
incorporating comparative assessments across SPs (RQ3) and by distinguishing
between different compromise modalities (RQ4). This increases both the level of
detail and depth of the analysis. While current approaches are limited to compro-
mise attribution without identifying the behavior that invalidates SPs, our work
focuses on comprehensive attacker-behavior identification and the development
of necessary analysis techniques (RQ5).
RQ1 How can an attacker model be extended to represent strong, active adver-
saries in automotive network architectures who participate maliciously in
protocol flows?
RQ2 Which approaches can make ARH-based hyperproperty analysis scalable
by reducing the number of compromise scenarios that must be verified?
RQ3 Which methods enable the comparison of compromise scenarios across
multiple security properties to assess and contrast invalidation conditions?
RQ4 How can compromise modalities (e.g. read vs. write permissions) be mod-
eled and analyzed to explain their impact on the invalidation of security
properties?
RQ5 How can ARH analysis be extended to identify and summarize adversarial
behavior that causes invalidation of security property?
Contributions Our contributions C1–C4, detailed in the next section, directly
address RQ1–RQ5. We map each contribution to its corresponding research
question.
C1 Adversarial CRASH-model
C2 Component compromise impact identification
C2.1 ARH verification orchestration algorithm
C2.2 Comparative multi-lemma analysis
C2.3 Fine granular adversarial permissions
C3 Comprehensive adversarial behavior analysis
C3.1 Interface between FV and process mining
C3.2 Synthetic event-log generation
C4 Prototypical implementation ImpACT & ROAD-Miner
Our “Compromised Realm Adversary System Hack” model (CRASH-model) (see
Sect. 2.1), contribution C1, successfully answers RQ1 by providing an adversary
model tailored to strong, active attackers in ANAs that covers permission levels,
compromise of protocol entities and network segments, message extraction and
injection, as well as complete takeover of entities including their full internal
knowledge.
Our second contribution C2 on identifying component-compromise impact com-
prises three sub-contributions. For C2.1 we present an ARH verification orches-
tration algorithm that significantly reduces HP verification runtime and complex-
ity via algorithmic improvements and thus enables the analysis of large problem
spaces and complex, fine-grained compromise scenarios as required by RQ2.

4
J. Figge et al.
For C2.2 we provide an extended comparative analysis of ARHs (see Sect. 3.2)
to answer RQ3 on the impact of different compromise scenarios across secu-
rity properties. With C2.3 we provide fine-grained adversarial permissions (see
Sect. 3.2) to answer RQ4 on analyzing how different compromise types and vari-
ants invalidate security properties.
C3 comprises of two sub-contributions that enable a comprehensive adversarial
behavior analysis (see Sect. 4) and answer RQ5. We provide an interface be-
tween FV and process mining (PM) in C3.1 via a formalization of component
definitions, translation elements, and mappings linking both fields. The synthetic
event-log generation C3.2 enables the use of security protocol verification traces
with PM algorithms to analyze the adversarial behavior. At the same time, the
behavioral analyses C3.1 and C3.2 add value to the compromise impact iden-
tification C2.2 and C2.3 and further answer RQ3–RQ4.
We validate the real-world applicability of our contributions C1–C3 as an an-
swer to RQ1–RQ5 with the help of our prototypical implementations ImpACT
and ROAD-Miner (C4; see Sect. 5).
Structure We introduce our case study in Sect. 2, define the attacker model,
present the ANA and protocol, and define the relevant security properties. We
then present our contributions for identifying the impact of component compro-
mises in Sect. 3, a fine-grained subdivision of compromises in Sect. 3.2, com-
parative SP analysis in Sect. 3.2, and an algorithmic verification-orchestration
approach in Sect. 3.3 that enables ARH verification under our attacker model.
Next, we present our contribution for the comprehensive adversarial-behavior
analysis in Sect. 4. We validate real-world relevance by applying the case study
to our prototypical implementation in Sect. 5. Finally, we discuss related work
in Sect. 6 and highlight how our contributions differs from existing research. We
conclude with a summary and outlook in Sect. 7.
2
Case Study
In the following, we describe our case study using a fictional battery management
system (BMS) protocol. We first present our contribution of the CRASH-model
as the adversarial model and subsequently the exemplary ANA.
We provide a level of detail that reflects an industrially relevant, real-world
example while remaining comprehensible.
2.1
Adversarial Model
We present our attacker model as an enhancement of the Dolev-Yao model (DY-
model), the standard adversarial model used in verification tools such as the
Tamarin Prover (Tamarin). Our “Compromised Realm Adversary System Hack”
model (CRASH-model) (see Fig. 1) is designed with a focus on ANAs and cy-
ber–physical systems. It adds extensions and modifications to better suit these
areas than the DY-model.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
5
A
B
C
D
m1
m2
m3
E
m4
F
k1,k2
m4
AD
m2
m′
2
m4
m′
4
k1
k′
1
Fig. 1: CRASH-model
At its core, the CRASH-
model introduces two key
changes. These changes
focus on entity and do-
main compromise and align
with our threat model,
which considers physical
access to networks (in-
cluding bus systems and Ethernet subnets). Access can lead to takeover and
compromise of entities such as electronic control units (ECUs).
First, the attacker model supports network segmentation (e.g. into domains). An
attacker can interact with traffic (messages on the network) only after compro-
mising a network segment (domain) or a participant (entity). It can intercept
messages inside compromised segments (e.g. m2 in Fig. 1) and inject forged
messages (m′
2). Alternatively, it can intercept messages to or from compromised
entities (m4) or inject such messages (m′
4).3 This first extension thus refines the
existing DY-model capabilities, while the second extension grants the attacker
completely new abilities. It can also read and even alter the internal knowledge
(k1) for all compromised entities.
Automotive Network Architecture
UseCase
DGW
TCU
Target
Inner
Internet-Facing
Car
Backend
Internet
Fig. 2: Exemplary ANA
Our
exemplary
ANA
(see
Fig. 2) is a simplified abstrac-
tion of a real-world ANA. The
ANA consists of two main
components: the vehicle and
the Internet. The vehicle is
represented by two network segments with different levels of criticality, regard-
ing security and safety. On the left is the Inner domain, the segment of higher
criticality, hosting the UseCase ECU. This placeholder is the protocol’s first com-
munication partner. Examples of highly critical ECUs include components such
as BMS and autonomous driving systems. The domain gateway (DGW) bridges
the Inner and Internet-Facing domains and communicates with the UseCase. In
the less critical Internet-Facing domain, the telematic control unit (TCU) is the
communication partner, connecting the vehicle to the Internet.
On the Internet, the (vehicle manufacturer’s) Backend segment hosts the ex-
emplary Target service, which is the protocol’s recipient and communication
partner for the TCU.
Protocol Description
Finally, we present our example protocol, based on the previously presented ANA
and used in the evaluation of the prototypical implementation (see Sect. 5). The
3 Extended capabilities, such as suppressing or modifying messages, are possible but
unnecessary here and are excluded from our model.

6
J. Figge et al.
protocol is intentionally insecure to facilitate demonstration.
It targets message authenticity4 [18], while message confidentiality relies on
closed network segments and communication channels.
We motivate the example with a BMS protocol, where an electric vehicle trans-
mits battery charge status, charge cycles, and temperature to the manufacturer
to optimize battery lifespan. The protocol below outlines BMS data transmission
in concise, abstracted form.
∼pkUC
UseCase
DGW
∼pkT
TCU
Target
Fr(∼n)
sigN=sign(∼n,∼pkUC)
<∼n,sigN>
<∼n,sigN>
Fr(∼oN)
nh=h(<∼n,∼oN>)
sigH=sign(nh,∼pkT)
<∼n,sigN,∼oN,sigH>
verify(sigN,∼n,pubUC)
nh=h(<∼n,∼oN>)
verify(sigH,nh,pubT)
Fig. 3: BMS Synchronization Protocol
The
BMS
UseCase
mon-
itors
relevant
battery
pa-
rameters
to
be
transmit-
ted
to
the
backend
and
stores
them
as
data
∼n.
The data ∼n is signed by
the
BMS
with
its
private
key ∼pkUC and sent to the
TCU
via the DGW. The
TCU adds vehicle-specific in-
formation
∼oN
and
signs
a
hash
of
the
combined
data ⟨∼n,∼oN⟩with its pri-
vate key ∼pkT. The data is
then transmitted to the man-
ufacturer’s Backend and the
corresponding BMS-Service Target,
which validates the BMS data and vehicular information integrity verify(...),
concluding the protocol.
Security Properties
We define the protocol’s security properties (SPs) under the specified threat
model (see Sect. 2.1), including resistance to an active attacker and partial com-
promise scenarios.
Secrecy of transmitted data The secrecy property requires that for every
nonce (∼n,∼oN) in any protocol execution, if at no time an entity’s private key
is revealed from the public key infrastructure (PKI), then there exists no time
point at which an adversary knows the nonces. Consequently, BMS and vehicular
data must remain unknown to the adversary, if no private key is leaked.
Authenticity of UseCase messages The authenticity property5 requires that
for any protocol execution ending with the target receiving the nonces, if at
4 From the perspective of the target, i.e. receiver, service.
5 See List. 1.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
7
no prior time point an entity’s private key was revealed, there must exist an
earlier time point at which the UseCase initiated the protocol run with the
same nonce ∼n. In other words, the BMS data received by the target must have
been sent (and generated) by the UseCase.
3
Identifying Impact of Component Compromise
We introduce our approach for the impact identification of component compro-
mise through Attack Resilience Hyperproperty analysis, as an essential founda-
tion for the following contributions. This enables analysis of complex compromise
scenarios with fine-grained permission models and multiple security properties
(SPs) across all possible respective combinations.
3.1
Approach Formalization
We subsequently formalize the components necessary for ARH analysis. This
formalization builds on our prior work on ARHs [9]. We first define ANAs, com-
prising the architecture and its application protocols. We then extend this with
domain-specific CRASH-model attacker model elements, SPs, and a model of
protocol executions, including component states, compromise scenarios and ad-
versarial behavior.
An ANA is a directed graph A = (E,L,D), with nodes E representing entities
such as ECUs or services, edges L ⊆E × E as directed communication links, and
domains D as network segments. For each e ∈E, we require (e,e) ∈L, providing
self-links for modeling internal computations. For each domain d ∈D, a special
node ed ∈E without links is included to support compromise modeling.
A message m = (l,n) ∈L×N is a tuple with link l ∈L (communication partners)
and contents n ∈N 6, forming the finite set of all messages M.
An entity’s e ∈E internal computations, such as cryptographic operations on
messages, are represented by internal messages ((e,e),n), enabling new values
and stored knowledge from a finite set K. To model dynamic knowledge pos-
session, we use a deterministic finite-state automaton (DFA) [31] with state
set Q = S × P(K) for finite state set S.
The state’s components (s,K′) ∈Q represent an entity’s internal state s ∈S and
current knowledge K′ ⊆K. The DFA is a tuple (Q,A,q0,δ,F) with Q = S×P(K)
for finite S, action alphabet A ⊆M, initial state q0 = (s0,k0) ∈Q with initial
state s0 and knowledge k0, transition function δ∶Q × A →Q, and set of final
states F ⊆Q. The transition function δ extends to ∆∶Q×A∗→Q via ∆(q,ε) = q
and ∆(q,aw) = ∆(δ(q,a),w) for all q ∈Q, a ∈A, and w ∈A∗. Final states F are
unused.
Each entity e ∈E is associated with a DFA T(e), modeling its dynamic behavior
via message contents; automata are not used for domains d ∈E. Transitions
in T(e) = (Q,A,q0,δ,F) occur only on messages involving the entity. We as-
sume A = M and δ(q,a) = q for any message a ∈A not involving entity e. Thus,
6 Typically a nonce from a set N of random numbers.

8
J. Figge et al.
the state of T(e) remains unchanged for messages where e is neither sender nor
receiver. For convenience, we assume a special message content tick = 0, which,
when sent as (l,tick) with l ∈L, causes no reaction, i.e. it does not change any
entity’s knowledge or state.
A protocol is a finite message sequence w ∈M ∗. Every entity e ∈E reacts as
described below; domain nodes ed with d ∈D are irrelevant because they lack
links, i.e. not occur in regular protocol execution. Let T(e) = (Q,M,q0,δ,F) be
the DFA of e, with knowledge after protocol execution w given by K(e,w) = K′,
where ∆(q0,w) = (s,K′). A protocol w is valid if for every prefix w′((s,r),n)
with final message ((s,r),n), we have n ∈K(s,w′).
We define the set of attacker capabilities, i.e. possible permission combinations,
as P = {∅,r,w,rw}7. Recall that E denotes the components (entities or domains).
A compromise is a mapping c∶E →P. In other words, a compromise assigns at-
tacker capabilities to each component. For convenience, we denote the compro-
mised components as dom(c) = {e ∈E ∣c(e) ≠∅}. We use our CRASH-model
(see Fig. 1). For any entity e ∈E compromised with read permission r or rw, all
messages to or from e can be intercepted. Similarly, messages ((s,r),n) involv-
ing a read-compromised domain d ∈D can be intercepted, i.e. c(ed) ∈{r,rw}
and {s,r} ∩d ≠∅. The adversary also has full access to the knowledge of read-
compromised entities. In other words, any message content n sent to or from
a read-compromised entity or domain is immediately known to the adversary,
along with the knowledge and internal state of read-compromised entities. Ad-
ditionally, the adversary can inject messages to and from write-compromised
entities c(e) ∈{w,rw} and domains c(ed) ∈{w,rw}, on behalf of the compro-
mised components. For such messages, we mark the spoofed endpoint with a
tick, yielding ((s′,r),n) or ((s,r′),n), respectively. We use this notation to dis-
tinguish cases: non-compromised entities are oblivious to spoofing and react
normally, including state and knowledge updates. Compromised entities react
only to messages in which they are not marked. Otherwise, all entities, including
compromised ones, react to protocol messages normally. This keeps the formal-
ization simple while preserving strong adversarial behavior and capabilities. The
adversary may use any possessed knowledge to craft injected messages; it is not
limited to the spoofed component’s knowledge.
We
define
an
Execution
Trace
as
an
even-length
message
sequence
w = m1m′
1m2m′
2⋯mnm′
n ∈M ∗, where messages m′
1,...,m′
n are controlled and
injected by the adversary. The special message ((e,e),tick) for any compromised
entity e ∈dom(c) lets the adversary refrain from injecting a real message, mod-
eling no reaction or change at that time.
An execution trace w is valid for compromise c if
n ∈
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
K(s,w′)
if s /∈dom(c)
⋃e∈E∶c(e)∈{r,rw} K(e,w′)
otherwise
for every prefix w′((s,r),n) of w.
We define the set of possible SPs as S.
7 Extending the utilized permissions to e.g. execution x and deletion d is conceivable.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
9
For a compromise c, security property S ∈S, and an execution trace w valid
for c, we write w ⊧c S if S holds for w. For a set L of execution traces valid for c,
we define L ⊧c S to be true iff w ⊧c S for all w ∈L. For any language L ⊆M ∗,
we define C(S,L) = {c∶E →P ∣∃w ∈L valid for c with w /⊧c S } as the set
of compromises for which some valid w ∈L violates security property S. The
complement C(S,L) = P E ∖C(S,L) represents compromises, where violations
of the security property S do not occur.
3.2
ARH Evaluation and Extension
We use our formalization to analyze ARHs, which enable examining responsi-
bility and involvement in SP invalidation across compromise scenarios. In other
words, ARHs identify which components are responsible for or involved in an
invalidation. To this end, we need to introduce a partial order on the capabilities
in the expected manner ∅< r < rw as well as ∅< w < rw, but r /< w /< r.8 For
compromises c,c′∶E →P we write c ⪯c′ if c(e) ≤c′(e) for all e ∈E. Finally, we
define c′ −c∶E →P by (c′ −c)(e) = ∅for all e ∈dom(c) and (c′ −c)(e) = c′(e)
otherwise.
ARH For the analysis, we employ the following ARHs [9]:
Necessary but not sufficient (NBNS) identifies individual components in
multistep compromises of SP S ∈S, defined as
NBNS = min⪯{c ∈C(S,L) ∣∃c′ ∈C(S,L)∶c ⪯c′,c′ −c ∈C(S,L)}.
Never responsible for Compromise (NRFC) comprises scenarios that
never contribute to invalidating a SP, defined as
NRFC = {c ∈C(S,L) ∣∀c′ ∈C(S,L)∶c ⪯c′ implies c′ −c ∈C(S,L)}.
Minimal Compromise Scenario (MCS) captures the smallest compromises
that invalidate a given SP, defined as MCS = min⪯C(S,L).
Single Point of Failure (SPOF) is a special case of MCS, defined as
SPOF = {c ∈C(S,L) ∣∣dom(c)∣= 1}.
Multiple security properties We extend the analysis beyond individual ARH
by evaluating multiple SPs simultaneously. This enables comparative analysis of
SPs by examining the compromise scenarios and execution traces that lead to
their invalidation. Consequently, we can identify weaknesses and ARHs that
span multiple SPs. To that end, we define the set S(c,L) ⊆S of SPs that a given
compromise scenario c causes to be invalidated by traces w ∈L as
S(c,L) = {S ∈S ∣∃w ∈L valid for c with w /⊧c S}
8 This is the expected Boolean algebra for the 2 capabilities of read r and write w.

10
J. Figge et al.
Fine Granular Compromise Our proposed adversary CRASH-model (see
Sect. 2.1) permits a wide range of attacker actions. We categorize these actions
and propose fine-granular compromises to model attacker capabilities. Permis-
sions follow a decomposition into non-empty combinations of read, write ac-
cess P = {∅,r,w,rw}. We provide the mapping c∶E →P between components,
i.e. protocol entities or domains and respective permissions granted through com-
promise. For our example (see Fig. 2), an attacker may have write access to the
Internet domain and only read access to the TCU. Arbitrary per-component
combinations are allowed; granting all capabilities recovers the previous coarse-
grained model. This model better reflects scenario-dependent attacker capabili-
ties (e.g. read-only memory extraction or physical man-in-the-middle injection)
and supports verification workflows that identify the minimal permissions re-
quired to invalidate a SP and isolate irrelevant permissions.
3.3
ARH-Verification Orchestration Algorithm
Introducing fine-grained attacker capabilities and multiple simultaneous SPs sig-
nificantly increases the number of scenarios for verification. ARH verification
must consider every compromise c∶E →P and each security property S ∈S.
Consequently, there are ∣P∣∣E∣⋅∣S∣scenarios to verify. Memory demands are
limiting the number of parallel executions of separate verifications. However,
the time complexity grows exponentially in the number ∣E∣of components and
the number p of capabilities as ∣P∣= 2p. In our example we have p = 2 and
thus ∣P∣= 4. On the other hand, the time complexity grows only linearly in the
number ∣S∣of SPs, which renders this factor manageable for complexity consider-
ations. Overall, we obtain long runtime and substantial computational demand.

A ↦r
A ↦rw
A ↦w
B ↦r
B ↦rw
B ↦w
A ↦r
B ↦r
A ↦r
B ↦w
A ↦r
B ↦rw
A ↦rw
B ↦r
A ↦rw
B ↦w
A ↦rw
B ↦rw
A ↦w
B ↦r
A ↦w
B ↦r
A ↦w
B ↦rw
Fig. 4:
Compromise
Graph
for
ARH-
Verification Traversal
In our case study, in which we
have 4 entities (ECUs), 3 do-
mains, 2 permissions, and 2 SP,
we require the verification of
(22)4+3 ⋅2 = 32,768 lemmas
(i.e. individual SPs to be vali-
dated against specific compro-
mise scenarios). Even under the
optimistic (and unrealistic) as-
sumption
that
each
verifica-
tion takes only one second,9
the total runtime is roughly
32,768s > 9h. Hence, a naive
verification strategy is imprac-
tical for complex ARH analy-
ses and an algorithmic improve-
ment is required.
9 Tamarin process has startup and other overheads.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
11
Below we present an algorithmic orchestration optimization that enables ver-
ification across all compromise scenarios and supports fine-grained capabilities
and multiple SPs. This optimization makes ARH verification for complex adver-
sarial and test scenarios in automotive network architectures feasible and is a
necessary prerequisite for PM analyses.
We exploit the monotonicity of SP invalidation with respect to compromised
entities and domains and their capabilities. If a SP S is invalidated by compro-
mise c, then any c′ with c ⪯c′ also invalidates S [11].
Instead of verifying all scenarios naively, we can thus simply identify the min-
imal scenarios MCS that cause violations. To this end, we perform a preorder
traversal of the Hasse diagram (see Fig. 4) of the partial order ⪯starting at
the least element, in which no entity is compromised. At each node we invoke
Tamarin to verify the SPs (lemmas). If all SPs hold, then the traversal proceeds.
Otherwise, for any SP invalidated, we simply mark all larger (with respect to ⪯)
scenarios as equally invalidated for that property and skip their (costly) verifi-
cation. This optimization leverages monotonicity under the compromise order ⪯
and thus avoids redundant checks. Traversal then resumes, and at each node we
verify only the properties not already marked invalidated.
3.4
Limitations
The FV of ANAs and their protocols with ARHs enables comprehensive, compar-
ative analysis of complex SP. For complex compromise scenarios, our approach
assigns responsibility for SP’s invalidation. We identify which components, un-
der which conditions (read or write access), influence SP invalidation, i.e. who
is responsible. A limitation of the current approach is the how: which adversar-
ial interactions cause invalidation in each scenario. Our approach yields many
traces across all invalidated scenarios; each scenario can produce multiple dis-
tinct traces, which are numerous and difficult to analyze manually.
4
Comprehensive Adversarial Behavior Analysis
We address the main limitation of ARH, enabling deducing the how in addition
to the who, by introducing an approach to PM of hypertraces. Our method sum-
marizes attacker behavior leading to SP invalidation, using PM as an additional
analysis step based on (ARH) execution traces that invalidate SP.
4.1
Formalization
Below, we formalize the components relevant for applying PM to execution
traces. PM concepts in this section are based on [30]. The analysis starts from
execution traces w ∈M ∗(see Sect. 3), which we convert and aggregate to an
event-log.

12
J. Figge et al.
We define the valid sets of execution traces L(S) that invalidate a specific
SP S as L(S) = {w ∈M ∗∣∃c∶E →P∶w /⊧c S and w is valid for c}. Prior to
aggregating execution traces into an event-log, we formalize the PM components
relevant for our analysis. An event ϵ = ⟨a,id,t⟩is an atomic activity occurrence
that contains an activity name a ∈A from a set of possible activities A, a case
identifier id ∈N that uniquely identifies the process instance to which the event
is assigned, and a time-stamp t ∈R. We let id(ϵ) = id be the identifier of an
event ϵ = ⟨a,id,t⟩.
The set of all possible events is denoted by E; every ϵ ∈E is an atomic, time-
stamped activity occurrence tied to exactly one case identifier.
An event trace σ is a finite sequence σ = ⟨ϵ1,ϵ2,...,ϵn⟩of events ϵi ∈E for
all 1 ≤i ≤n such that all events in σ belong to the same case; i.e., id(ϵi) = id(ϵj)
for all 1 ≤i,j ≤n. Thus we also write id(σ) = id(ϵ1) for the case of the trace.
An event trace denotes a single process instance and the set of all possible traces
is denoted by E∗.
An event-log L is a set L = {σ1,σ2,...,σn} of event traces. Different traces
in an event-log represent unique cases: for any σ,σ′ ∈L with σ ≠σ′ we have
id(σ) ≠id(σ′).
A process mining algorithm MA maps event-logs to process models:
MA∶P(E∗) →M, where P(E∗) is the set of all event-logs (sets of event traces)
and M is the set of all process models. We abstract internal details and treat MA
as a black box that returns a model m ∈M for a given log L.
We define the function fa∶M →A to map every message m in an execution
trace w ∈M ∗to an activity name fa(m) ∈A. For modeling convenience, we
simply let the activity label be the concatenation of the message components, so
for a message m = ((s,r),c) we set fa(m) = s ○r ○c. Let fid∶M ∗→N return a
unique non-negative integer (identifier) for any execution trace w ∈M ∗. Finally,
let ∆t > 0 be some arbitrary increment.
We define the transformation T ∶M ∗
→
E∗to map an execution trace
w = ⟨m1,...,mn⟩and its unique case identifier i = fid(w) to an event trace
T (w) = ⟨⟨fa(m1),i,1 ⋅∆t⟩,...,⟨fa(mn),i,n ⋅∆t⟩⟩.
Let L(S) = {w1,...,wn} be the finite set of distinct execution traces obtained
by formal verification that invalidate the SP S ∈S. Each w ∈L(S) is a distinct
counterexample to S. To create a synthetic event-log SL(S), we transform the
execution traces of L(S) via T to an event-log. The synthetic event-log SL(S)
is the following set of event traces.
SL(S) = {T (w) ∣w ∈L(S)}
This event-log SL(S) is the input to the PM algorithm MA and yields a process
model M = MA(SL(S)).
L(S)
T
ÐÐ→SL(S)
MA
ÐÐÐ→M.
In summary, our method bridges formal verification and process mining via a
dedicated pipeline: counterexample traces L(S) are aggregated into a synthetic

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
13
event-log SL(S) using the transformation function T , and a PM algorithm MA
maps SL(S) to a process model M.
4.2
Classification and Limitations of the Approach
Our approach provides an exploratory contribution to applying PM for security-
focused insights from FV results. To our knowledge, there is no previous related
work in this area (see Sect. 6).
We leverage PM techniques to achieve high replay fitness and precision, so the
discovered model reflects the event-logs and permits only observed behavior (or
behavior representing filtered simplifications). Model simplicity should be bal-
anced against the complexity needed to capture real adversarial behavior, which
makes the generalization less critical.
Furthermore, our overarching goal diverges from typical PM objectives. Our fo-
cus is on identifying behavior patterns, individual or collective, rather than scru-
tinizing entire process flows. Thus, depicting a complete, flawless process flow is
out of scope. Understanding relevant (attacker) behavior suffices to address and
mitigate potential invalidation.
5
Prototypical Implementation
Our prototypical implementation comprises two components (see Fig. 6). The
first is Improved Adversary Compromise Tool (ImpACT), our contribution for
in-depth ARH verification with Tamarin. The second is “Reconstructing Ori-
gins of Adversarial Damage”-Miner (ROAD-Miner), our contribution enabling
PM on FV (hyper)traces. We demonstrate their practical use and the resulting
substantial benefits through our case study.
5.1
“ImpACT”
Fig. 5: ImpACT
We present our proto-
type Improved Adver-
sary Compromise Tool
(ImpACT), a direct evo-
lution of our previous
work Extended Adver-
sary Compromise Tool
(ExACT) [9]. ImpACT,
built on a Node.js tech
stack, enables fully au-
tomated ARH verifica-
tion and further analy-
sis by processing interim outputs. As a wrapper around Tamarin, Improved
Adversary Compromise Tool (ImpACT) provides pre- and post-processing for
formal models of ANAs and their protocols, including the SP to verify, using
Tamarin’s security protocol theory format as input.

14
J. Figge et al.
Architecture &
Protocol Model
Algorithmic
Verification
Preprocessing
Preprocessing
Preprocessing
Enriched
Model
Enriched
Model
Enriched
Model
Controlled
Verification
Controlled
Verification
Controlled
Verification
Tamarin Prover
Verification
Results
Postprocessing
Verification
Results
Postprocessing
Verification
Results
Postprocessing
ARH-Extraction
Output and
Visualization
ImpACT
Event-Log
Conversion
Generated
Event-Log
Process Mining
Output and
Visualization
RoadMINER
Fig. 6: ImpACT / RoadMINER
Execution of ImpACT begins with
our verification orchestration algorithm
(see Sect. 3.3), generating a graph of
all compromise, capability combinations
and traversing it in preorder. For each
scenario (a compromise plus capabili-
ties), pre-processing enriches the base the-
ory with the scenario; controlled veri-
fication is then executed, and the re-
sults are post-processed via parsing and
evaluation. A feedback loop uses per-
(security)property post-processing results
to guide the traversal. Consequently, we
verify only those SPs whose lemmas have
not already been marked invalid for a pre-
viously examined subset, improving run-
time. After Tamarin verification, post-
processing converts Tamarin-specific out-
put into a reusable, machine-readable for-
mat augmenting it with analyses and com-
promise details. Using this data, ARH verification is performed, assessing all SP
across all scenarios.
Within the web interface (see Fig. 5), ARH results are presented in a concise
overview. The interface has two views: On the left, is a graph, where each node
represents one ARH result for a given scenario (compromised entities, domains
with capabilities) and lemma, and is colored accordingly. Nodes with similar
characteristics and identical SP are clustered via a physics-based10 layout, and
edges encode order relations between scenarios. On the right, a detailed table
lists the ARH results per scenario, including sub-tables for evaluated SPs and
their associated traces. The header bar enables filtering, e.g. by compromise size,
included entities/domains, SPs, and ARH outcomes.
5.2
ROAD-Miner
“Reconstructing Origins of Adversarial Damage”-Miner (ROAD-Miner) follows
ImpACT’s post-processing of Tamarin results (see Fig. 6) to generate synthetic
event-logs that capture attacker behavior invalidating SP. Beyond attribution
of compromise focused ARH analysis, our focus here is the sequence of steps
required to violate a given SP.
We use verification results, i.e. SP-invalidating traces, for event-log creation (see
Sect. 4). Although our approach is tool-agnostic, Tamarin, which is utilized for
the prototype, does not provide traces directly. However, we leverage Tamarin’s
ability to render trace graphs, not only via DOT/Graphviz, but also via experi-
mental JSON output. We provide a custom parser for the undocumented JSON
10 I.e. gravity simulation via d3js

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
15
format enabling structured trace graph generation.
For Eventlog Conversion, we first filter out traces that do not depict SP invali-
dation. We exploit that trace graphs are structured as a directed acyclic graph
(DAG). Using the trace graphs of each invalidated lemma we utilize a topological
sort to obtain ordered trace steps. We apply this to all counterexample traces of
the respective SP and collect them into sets.
From these sets of ordered steps we extract event-log–relevant information (e.g.
activity, affected component). Each trace receives a unique ID and incremental
time-stamps are assigned by step order and case. Finally, event-logs are exported
as separate CSV files per SP.
The PM analysis can be performed on these event-logs. For this step, we use
Process Mining Toolkit (ProM) [1], though any PM tool suffices. In ProM, we
e.g. apply interactive Data-aware Heuristics Mine (iDHM) [19] and Convert log
to directly follows graph [16] modules after converting CSV to eXtensible Event
Stream (XES) and applying filters.
The ROAD-Miner results provide evaluations including directly-follows graphs
(DFGs), dependency graphs, process trees, Petri nets, and causal nets, enabling
users to trace attacker behavior leading to SP invalidation, i.e. the specific re-
quired steps.
5.3
Evaluation of Case Study
Fig. 7: Filtered ImpACT Result-Graph
Our contributions, implemented
in the prototypical tools Im-
pACT and ROAD-Miner, are
assessed via a case study on
uploading BMS data to the
backend (see Sect. 2). We
demonstrate their value by
evaluating secrecy of trans-
mitted data
and authentic-
ity of communication between
the UseCase and Target (see
Sect. 2.1) within the case
study protocol.
We analyze the results pro-
duced by ImpACT and pre-
sented in the web interface.
Beyond
the
comprehensive
tabular analysis (see Fig. 5), we highlight the concise, accessible presentation
of ImpACT results (see Fig. 7)11. For the result evaluation, we use the ability
to filter ARH outcomes for Minimal Compromise Subset (purple), Single Point
11 Results are dynamically highlighted for readability, which the screenshot does not
capture.

16
J. Figge et al.
of Failure (pink), and Necessary but not Sufficient (yellow).12The results group
into three clusters, reflecting the two verified lemmas (SP) and their invalidation
by the respective compromises.
The first cluster covers secrecy invalidation: confidentiality of UseCase pro-
vided data ∼n and TCU -provided information ∼oN, composed of Single Point of
Failure ARH components. For this SP, each minimal compromise scenario has
a single element, so secrecy can be breached by compromising just one compo-
nent. This invalidation requires only read compromise, either of the ECUs TCU
or Target, or the CarInternetFacing or Backend domains. This is expected in the
protocol’s context: the TCU supplies the additional information for invalidation
∼oN only in later stages. Thus, only components at or beyond the TCU in the
protocol execution suffice to breach the property. Write access is not required
for knowledge extraction.
In contrast to the secrecy SP, authenticity (see List. 1) results split into two
clusters. The first cluster contains single-component elements whose compromise
is necessary but not sufficient for invalidation. Notably, only compromising the
UseCase is read-based; all other related scenarios are write-based. These ap-
pear in the second cluster, where each write-based compromise combined with
the UseCase read-compromise forms a Minimal Compromise Subset that invali-
dates authenticity. The ability to evaluate multiple SPs simultaneously enables
comparison of component involvement. It is apparent that, aside from the CarIn-
ternetFacing domain and the TCU appearing in multi-component compromises
for authenticity, the components required for invalidation diverge. Furthermore,
the common components require read permissions for secrecy but write permis-
sions for authenticity.
To break authenticity, the UseCase must be impersonated through injection of
a malicious message. This requires a read-based compromise of the UseCase to
extract its private key ∼pkUC and message injection in the protocol flow before
TCU processing .
lemma authenticity_of_use_case:
" All useCase target nonce #j .
EndWithNonce(useCase,target,nonce)@j
& (not Ex entity #r . PkiPrivatekeyReveal(
entity)@r)
==> Ex #i .
InitiateTransport(useCase,target,nonce)@i
& #i < #j "
Listing 1: Authenticity Lemma
Our extended ARH analysis with
ImpACT supports analysis of com-
plex ANA, comparatively examining
component roles in invalidating mul-
tiple SPs under fine-grained permis-
sions, answering “who is responsible?”.
For secrecy, the behavior enabled by
the compromises that lead to SP in-
validation, i.e. “how is the SP invalidated?”, can still be intuitively inferred. This
already becomes challenging when evaluating authenticity.
To address this, we extend the analysis with ROAD-Miner to identify be-
havior that invalidates message authenticity. We use PM to capture not only
the “What” but also the “How” and synthesize adversarial behaviors across all
compromise scenarios. ROAD-Miner uses ImpACT’s intermediate results as the
12 Compromise scenarios regularly verified and invalidated, as well as those labeled
Never responsible for Compromise, are not of interest here.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
17
Fig. 8: Authenticity Violating Causal-Net
basis for analysis, converting and aggregating them into synthetic event-logs. To
ease processing, we provide logfiles in XES format.
The event-log was then imported into PM software; we used the open-source
ProM. We filtered the event-log to improve clarity. Steps irrelevant to invalida-
tion (e.g. component initialization and PKI registration) were excluded, assumed
established before protocol start and attacker actions.
Fig. 9: Authenticity violating DFG
Afterward,
we
ana-
lyzed the authenticity event-
log with the iDHM mod-
ule [19] and produced a
Causal net (see Fig. 8)
and a DFG (see Fig. 9).
We condense all adver-
sarial behavior that in-
validates the authentic-
ity SP, the adversarial
and protocol steps of ev-
ery invalidating compro-
mise scenario trace in the
Tamarin results, into the
corresponding graphs via
PM. This higher infor-
mation density provides
a comprehensive overview
of all possible attacks and
their required steps. Both
graphs resemble bottom-
up PM approaches: the
Causal net uses the Flexi-
ble Heuristic Miner dependency heuristic and Cohen’s Kappa as the conditional
heuristic with default settings, and the DFG is generated with event name as
the event classifier and event classes as the variant.

18
J. Figge et al.
Using FV-based ARH analysis, we identify compromised components causing
SP invalidation. The PM result graphs (see Fig. 8 and Fig. 9) clarify attacker
intervention points for breaking authenticity in the protocol: Compromising the
UseCase private key ∼pkUC is the invalidation prerequisite and start of the PM
graphs. This matches the ARH “necessary but not sufficient” for UseCase read
compromise. The adversary generates a spoofed nonce and signs it with the
compromised key. Consistent with the ARH analysis, a write compromise of the
TCU, DGW, or a vehicular domain (Inner or InternetFacing) lets the adversary
inject the spoofed nonce, thus invalidating authenticity. This aligns with the
ARH “Minimal Compromise Subset” results.
The injection must occur before the TCU in the protocol run, since it adds ad-
ditional information and also signs the UseCase nonce. Thereafter, the protocol
proceeds normally.
5.4
Correctness and Limitations of Results
Our case study shows that our approach augments ARH evaluation of invali-
dation responsibility by illustrating attacker strategies with ROAD-Miner. We
extend ARH analysis to comparative assessment of SPs and to attribute invali-
dation to specific, permission-based compromises. The complex analysis required
is enabled by our verification-orchestration algorithm. We summarize and con-
dense numerous non-machine-readable Tamarin traces with PM, producing clear
and analyzable models. We provide a concise, machine-analyzable summary of
invalidating traces using PM.
The diverse results are, aside from minor details, content-identical and reflect
actual behavior in the Tamarin traces. Our comparison of Tamarin-identified
traces with the constructed process models supports performance assessment:
There is no generalization; the model captures only attacker behavior in invali-
dating traces and maintains precision; only trace-contained activities are present.
From a security architect’s perspective, we achieve a meaningful balance between
simplicity (simplifying relations and filtering activities) and replay fitness (in-
cluding all relevant steps as activities).
Using PM requires trade-offs for complex relationships (e.g. many invalidating
traces) in one graph. With effective representations (e.g. DFG) and pre-filtering
irrelevant steps, density reduces significantly. A balance between complexity and
simplified relationships must be maintained. Given expected partial compromises
in automotive systems, focusing only on protecting critical components is insuf-
ficient to prevent SP invalidation. From a security architect’s perspective, PM
graphs help evaluate attacker behavior and prevent invalidating steps. Beyond
the alignment between compromise scenarios and attacker behavior observed in
PM, correctness can be verified intuitively: First, identify invalidating attacker
behavior in the PM results. Leverage PM features (e.g. DFGs) to highlight fre-
quent invalidating behaviors. Then refine the protocol to prevent the behavior.
Finally, rerun analysis with ImpACT and ROAD-Miner to confirm the cause for
invalidation is no longer present.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
19
6
Related Work
Our contribution is a fine-grained model of attacker capabilities for component
compromise in automotive network architectures. [7] use a similar approach,
using “attacker privileges” to constrain actions (e.g. read, write) on compo-
nents such as ECUs. In contrast to their focus on attack-tree generation, we
utilize this approach to define a fine-grained attacker model and its capabilities
for security protocol verification. We propose CRASH-model, an automotive-
and cyber–physical system-specific extension of the DY-model adversary model
that includes component and network-segment compromise and the injection or
extraction of entity-internal knowledge. While [23] extends the DY-model for
cyber–physical systems (hardware/physical attacks) and [3] integrates computa-
tional aspects, our approach captures properties crucial for modeling adversaries
in automotive network architectures.
Our contribution improves feasibility and performance (runtime and effi-
ciency) in analyzing ARHs, focusing on security hyperproperties and network
architectures via security protocol verification. In contrast to [10], which veri-
fies HP of hardware modules using automata-based algorithms in HyperLTL and
HyperCTL∗, and [22], which proposes an algorithm for ∀∃-safety in infinite-state
software systems, our work targets security-specific HP.
Our work extracts extended security-property information, including adver-
sarial attack patterns, via process mining (PM) of synthetic event-logs from
security protocol verification traces.
PM has been applied to security; [29] analyzed audit trails using the α-algorithm
to detect violations. However, to our knowledge, no prior work uses outputs of
formal or security protocol verification tools, focused on SPs, as input to PM.
[5] use statistical model checking to simulate event-logs and PM to build a “diff”
model highlighting discrepancies between expected and observed behavior. Their
analysis targets real-world physical threat models (e.g. bank robberies) rather
than network architectures or communication protocols.
Prior work has explored the reverse direction: combining PM with formal meth-
ods. [28] employ event logs as input for model checking, specifically leveraging
LTL-based techniques. [21] utilized PM to derive labeled transition systems. Fur-
thermore, [13] integrate compliance rules into process models for checking and
visualizing results directly within the model.
7
Conclusion and Outlook
This section concludes by distilling this work’s contributions and positioning
them in terms of their significance and limitations.
We propose a novel adversarial model CRASH-model C1, representing a strong
active attacker tailored to fit and capture the specifics of the automotive domain.
Consequently, we answered RQ1 and established part of the formal foundation
for C2. Although the attacker model is tailored to automotive use cases due to
domain-specific customization, it can be generalized to cyber–physical systems

20
J. Figge et al.
and, more broadly, to network architectures.
We enable impact identification for component compromise C2 through im-
proved ARH analysis, enabling finer-grained properties in more complex ANAs.
We achieve this with a novel ARH verification-orchestration algorithm C2.1 that
substantially extends Attack Resilience Hyperproperty (ARH) analysis capabil-
ities to complex automotive network architectures (ANAs) and answers RQ2.
It also enables comparative multi-security property (SP) analysis C2.2 (answer-
ing RQ3) and a fine-grained adversarial permission model C2.3 (answering
RQ4). This extended ARH analysis attributes SP invalidations to permissions
and components (entities, domains) in ANAs compromise scenarios. It reveals
which component–permission combinations, as compromise scenarios, invalidate
which SP. A limitation is that it identifies relevant components but not the at-
tacker behavior causing invalidation.
We address this limitation through comprehensive adversarial-behavior anal-
ysis C3, answering RQ5. Leveraging ARH verification results, we synthesize
event-logs (C3.2) upon which we apply process mining (PM) (C3.1). This novel
approach, bridging FV and PM, reveals attacker behavior leading to SPs inval-
idations, enabling systematic ANA hardening.
To demonstrate real-world applicability of our contributions, we verify the se-
curity of an example ANA’s battery management system protocol via a case
study. We operationalize C1–C3 with two prototypes, Improved Adversary Com-
promise Tool (ImpACT) and “Reconstructing Origins of Adversarial Damage”-
Miner (ROAD-Miner), comprising C4. The case study evaluation confirms sub-
stantial benefits for formal security verification of ANAs. However, given the pro-
totype nature of the implementation, the full potential of ImpACT and ROAD-
Miner has not yet been fully realized.
We outline future research directions that build on our contributions and help
remove current limitations. Fundamentally, ImpACT and ROAD-Miner can be
integrated into a cohesive, fully automated tool, utilizing PM libraries, like e.g.
PM4Py [4] rather than a GUI tool. We have intentionally deferred this to allow
qualitative, case-specific log filtering during pre-processing. Further implementa-
tion is required for more advanced automation. This automation is a promising
research direction, towards improving design and verification of ANAs and secu-
rity protocols. Moreover, further insights could be gained through more sophisti-
cated PM analyses. Rather than running analyses outside the PM toolchain, ad-
vanced evaluations could be embedded directly in the PM workflow, e.g. scoring,
categorizing, and identifying attacker behavior patterns. Additionally, further
exploration of extended PM applications is worthwhile. For instance, PM could
support creating general or domain-specific artifacts (e.g. threat and risk anal-
yses (TARAs)), deriving attack trees, and informing component-specific threat
and risk assessments.
Disclosure of Interests. The authors have no competing interests to declare that
are relevant to the content of this article.

Process-Mining for Formal Security Verification of Automotive Architectures
21