Core Logic and Algorithmic Performance Enhancements for a System Vulnerability Analysis 
Technique for Complex Mission Critical Systems Implementation 
 
 
Matthew Tassava, Cameron Kolodjski, Jordan Milbrath, Jeremy Straub 
Institute for Cyber Security Education and Research 
North Dakota State University 
1320 Albrecht Blvd., Room 258 
Fargo, ND 58108 
Phone: +1-701-231-8196 
Fax: +1-701-231-8255 
Email: matthew.tassava@ndsu.edu, cameron.kolodjski@ndsu.edu, jordan.milbrath@ndsu.edu 
jeremy.straub@ndsu.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Core logic and processing improvements were made to the software for operations and network attack 
results review (SONARR) and are presented, herein. Previous SONARR versions’ Boolean-only logic, 
derived from the Blackboard Architecture, was replaced with generic logic that allows any .NET type 
(e.g., integers, decimals, strings) to be utilized within facts. This allows calculations and equality 
operations with all data types to drive the algorithm’s processing of network models. Additionally, multi-
compute capabilities were implemented to increase the processing power for larger workloads. In this 
paper, the new logic objects are described, examples are presented to illustrate the efficacy of creating 
digital-twin systems using the new generic logic, and performance test results are presented that illustrate 
the expanded processing capability from the multi-compute functionality. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
A system vulnerability analysis technique (SVAT) was presented in [1] that implemented an explainable 
rule-fact artificial intelligence (AI) as the core logic for a technology that could analyze complex mission 
critical systems (CMCS). The core technology for this analysis technique is the software for operations 
and network attack results review (SONARR). 
 
SONARR is an SVAT tool built on the Blackboard Architecture’s Boolean rule-fact logic. It takes a user-
built digital twin of a real system – represented as collections of containers, links, facts, common 
properties, and rules – and processes it by triggering rules and changing facts along a pathway through the 
network model. The objects that comprise the network model represent aspects of the environment under 
assessment. Containers can be entities such as people, places, or things. Facts are the attributes of those 
entities. Links model the relationships between containers. Common properties group facts of specific 
types. Rules implement the performable activities in the environment. 
 
Actively changing facts during traversal simulates the dynamic real-world environment and allows the 
SONARR algorithm to evaluate rules in different areas of the network that would not have been in the 
applicable state, if the network environment was static. The results of SONARR analysis are the paths an 
attacker could take through a given network, complete with information on what rules were triggered, 
where in the network those rules were triggered, the facts that were altered, and the order of containers the 
paths take. The overall objective of SONARR is to provide an explainable and automated artificial 
intelligence solution for system vulnerability analysis that human analysts can use to facilitate securing 
systems. 
 

Over the course of development, the SONARR technology has been improved in a number of ways, such 
as by adding object referencing during processing [2] and implementing multi-threading [3] to expedite 
processing large networks. Overall, improvement of algorithm performance has been a predominant 
developmental focus, as shown through the enhancements and experimentation described in [3]. The 
upgrades introduced in this paper enhance SONARR’s algorithmic performance and its core logic that is 
used for assessment during network processing. 
 
2. Background 
 
SONARR’s logic is built upon a rule-fact logic evaluation system called the Blackboard Architecture. 
The Blackboard Architecture was introduced by Hayes-Roth in the 1980s [4], based on similar 
technology that was used in the HEARSAY-II system that was proposed in a DARPA-sponsored 
competition for speech recognition software [5]. The technology has been used for various applications, 
such as agent coordination in real-time strategy games [6], countering terrorism [7], software testing [8], 
medical imaging [9], [10], PROLOG programming [11], robotics development [12], [13], [14], [15], and 
mathematical proof creation [16]. 
 
The Blackboard Architecture uses logic similar to rule-fact expert systems AI. These systems embody the 
knowledge of experts, for a particular topic, as cause-effect parameters in a knowledge base. They enact 
changes on a fact set via rules associated with the knowledge base. Rule-fact expert systems are an 
inherently explainable technology that provides clear, human interpretable reasoning to reach its 
conclusion [17]. This makes it a promising methodology to implement eXplainble AI (XAI) that humans 
can trust with important tasks. 
 
The term ‘explainable’, within AI, refers to human understandability of the processes used by the AI to 
reach its conclusion. The recent advances in machine learning have made AI a popular technology within 
the computing community [18]; however, many AI techniques’ opaque nature makes their conclusions 
difficult to verify, discouraging trust in their decision-making capabilities [19], [20]. To this end, DARPA 
launched an initiative to develop XAI machine learning models that can provide mechanisms for humans 
to follow their reasoning, while still providing a “high level of learning performance” [21]. 
 
SONARR’s technology implements XAI through the use and expansion of the Blackboard Architecture, 
an already explainable AI mechanism. It builds upon attack chain patterning, like the MITRE ATT&CK 
[22] and the Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain [23] frameworks, to establish an XAI that can identify 
possible attack pathways through a given network. 
 
3. Technology 
 
The data assessed by SONARR is stored as a network made up of objects that serve various roles. 
Containers and links describe node-to-node relationships and provide the network’s topology, while also 
housing facts that rules assess during processing. The facts within the containers, links, and network hold 
values that describe attributes and collectively represent network states. The rules utilize pre- and 
postconditions to assess the network facts through cause and effect-like patterns. These and other objects 
make up the networks that the SONARR algorithm pulls data from during assessment. 
 
3.1. Network Objects 
 
This section reviews and discusses the networks objects and their roles in the SONARR technology. 
 
3.1.1. Action 
 

The action object allows rules to interact with the operating system running the software. This allows a 
rule to trigger and invoke an action that runs a command on the target operating system, performing any 
task achievable through the command line interface. 
 
For example, if a user wanted the Notepad application to run any time a specific rule is triggered, an 
action that could perform this would have the command “notepad.exe”. This is the command for 
PowerShell to open a notepad window. Actions run during traversal processing, when their associated 
rules are triggered, whether the path is a final path or not. If this action is tied to a rule that triggers four 
times during the SONARR traversal session, there would be four notepad windows open at the end. 
 
Figure 1 depicts an action object with a description of “run Notepad executable” and a command string of 
“notepad.exe”. 
 
 
Figure 1. Depiction of an action object. 
 
3.1.2. Common Property 
 
The common property object is an important part of SONARR’s extended rule-fact logical assessment 
capabilities. They allow generic rules to be truly flexible in the Blackboard Architecture by associating 
rule conditions with common properties that facts share, instead of having rules directly reference facts 
themselves. Because each fact is an object in the network, one rule can be created that applies to multiple 
areas of the network by applying to multiple facts. 
 
Figure 2 depicts three string-type common properties that indicate system privilege level, the operating 
system, and the operating system version. 
 
 
Figure 2. Depiction of three common property objects. 
 
3.1.3. Container 
 
The container object is an entity object that represents a node in a network. This object can represent any 
item in the world such as hardware, software, people, places, or groups. Attributes of the represented item 
are stored in the container as facts. Container objects are combined with link objects to create a network 
model of inter-connections and relationships that SONARR processes. 
 
Figure 3 depicts an example of a PC container object with the name PC-1307. It has a parent container of 
VLAN12, and three facts describing the computer’s privilege level, operating system, and operating 
system version. 
 

 
Figure 3. Depiction of a container object. 
 
3.1.4. Container Type 
 
The container type object associates a type and an associated image/icon with containers. The type (such 
as a PC, database, firewall, or person) can be used to categorize the containers of the network. These are 
relatively unimportant objects within the processing of a network, but they facilitate displaying visual 
representations of the network. 
 
3.1.5. Entity 
 
The entity object provides inheritance functionality for containers and links, both of which represent 
mutable elements of the network. To facilitate this, entity objects hold the facts that containers and links 
use as attributes during SONARR processing. Because both containers and links inherit and behave like 
entities within the network, they will be referred to as entities, in this paper, in some cases. 
 
3.1.6. Fact 
 
Fact objects represent attributes of an entity or environment. Facts’ purpose is to store a value that is 
assessed, and possibly altered, through SONARR’s rule-fact logic. They can be associated with a 
common property identifier for specific rule assessments. They are not unique to an entity, meaning that 
multiple entities can hold the same fact. 
 
A fact can have any .NET value type (such as string, integer, decimal, or Boolean). A fact that is 
associated with a common property identifier must use the identifier’s value type. 
 
Figure 4 depicts three fact objects associated with common property identifiers. Each fact has a string 
value (matching the value type of their common property identifiers) that describes what the fact 
represents. 
 
 

Figure 4. Depiction of three fact objects. 
 
3.1.7. Link 
 
Links are entity objects that represent relationships between two containers (nodes) of a network. The link 
object was designed as an entity, inheriting facts and properties, so that events affecting a relationship 
between network entities can be modeled. Additionally, the link object allows SONARR to move through 
the network by providing directional connections between containers. 
 
For example, Figure 5 depicts an ethernet link between two computers, PC-1307 and PC-1309. It has a 
traversability value—a decimal number representing order of importance during processing—of 0.97 and 
facts that represent properties of the ethernet connection. The cable type fact has a string value of Cat6, 
the cable length fact has an integer value of 50, and the data rate fact has an integer value of 10. 
 
 
Figure 5. Depiction of a link object. 
 
3.1.8. Rule 
 
Rule objects provide the logic assessment within SONARR. Large collections of rules are evaluated for 
each container-link-container connection the SONARR algorithm processes. Evaluation of a rule begins 
with the preconditions, which define the fact values the network/connection must have for successful 
evaluation. If the preconditions return true, processing moves on to the postconditions, which enact a 
predefined alteration to network facts. 
 
The confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) triad is a collection of metrics used to assess the 
impact of vulnerabilities, exploits, and attacks [24]. These metrics are used within rules to express the 
impact rules can have on a target system. CIA metrics are stored inside rule objects so users can analyze 
the CIA impact of rules during and after traversal. 
 
Rules’ run time values express how long the activities represented by a rule would take to run in a live 
environment. The rule’s success value is defined by the user at rule creation and indicates severity. This 
value is used in SONARR to order rules by severity before processing. 
 
There are two types of rules: traversal and non-traversal rules. This is represented with a Boolean value 
that is set by the user at rule creation. Traversal rules are evaluated during processing and advance the 
algorithm across the connections that the traversal rule triggers on. Non-traversal rules solely alter the 
environment and do not involve movement. 
 
Figure 6 depicts a rule that unlocks a server room door. The rule’s preconditions assess the state of the 
link within the connection (i.e., whether it is locked and if the passcode has been obtained). The 
postcondition specifies what change happens if the preconditions are met (i.e., the server room door is 
unlocked). 

 
 
Figure 6. Depiction of a rule object. 
 
3.1.9. Precondition 
 
The precondition object is used, in a rule, to indicate which elements of the network/environment must 
have a specific value for the rule to trigger. The object is comprised of requirements and a lambda 
expression that is compiled into an invokable operation that evaluates to a Boolean. 
 
The operation (compiled expression) takes an array of objects, which are collected by the SONARR 
algorithm based on the requirements. Genericism allows any fact type (such as integer, string, decimal, or 
Boolean) to be used as input for the operation. Each requirement is a tuple that specifies where (i.e., 
container1, link, container2, or network) the algorithm finds the fact. Those facts’ values are input into the 
operation and evaluated. The precondition is satisfied if the operation returns true. 
 
Figure 7 depicts a precondition that evaluates if a server door is locked. The requirements are collected 
from the network and input into the operation for evaluation. The precondition is satisfied due to the 
operation evaluating to true. 
 
 
Figure 7. Depiction of a precondition. 
 
3.1.10. Postcondition 
 
The postcondition object is used to define an alteration that will be performed on a target fact. Just like 
precondition objects, postconditions utilize requirements and a compiled expression. However, instead of 
evaluating to a Boolean result, the postcondition’s operation produces the value that the target fact will be 
assigned. The SONARR algorithm uses the target property of the condition to locate the target fact and 
sets its value to the operation’s result. 

 
Figure 8 depicts a postcondition that unlocks a server room door based on a four-digit keycode. 
 
 
Figure 8. Depiction of a postcondition. 
 
3.2. Processing Objects 
 
This section discusses the processing objects that are instrumental to the SONARR algorithm. Their 
function during network assessment is also discussed. 
 
3.2.1. Connection 
 
The connection object is an output of the SONARR algorithm. It is used to create reality paths, which are 
made by chaining created connections together chronologically. It also records the network changes made 
via SONARR’s rule-fact assessment at the container-link-container (connection) level of the network. 
These changes are made to the connection and appended to reality paths, so the underlying network 
model is not changed. Connections provide an iterative history of a reality path that can be stepped 
through during post-processing. 
 
Figure 9 depicts a connection object with example variant entities, which comprise the connection itself. 
An example rule is also shown in the list of triggered rules. 
 
 
Figure 9. Depiction of a connection object. 
 
3.2.2. Reality Path 
 
The reality path object is created and output by SONARR. Each reality path represents a unique traversal 
that an attacker could take through a network. The reality path object is built connection-by-connection 
during processing. It records the rules triggered and the facts altered, as it goes. Making and recording 
changes within the reality path allows the original network to remain untouched. This is important 

because multiple reality paths are built simultaneously during traversal. Each requires a pristine base 
network to reference during processing. 
 
Figure 10 depicts a reality path object with two connections. The first connection is between a room and a 
PC, through a keyboard, and the second connection is between a PC and another PC, via an ethernet link. 
This reality path describes access from development room 13 to PC-1309. The active variant facts define 
user privilege on PC-1307 and that trojan malware is being file shared. 
 
 
Figure 10. Depiction of a reality path object. 
 
3.3. Algorithm 
 
The purpose of the SONARR algorithm is to find all routes through a network from a user-defined start 
container to a user-defined end container, by applying a set of rules on the network’s set of facts, without 
cross-influencing the generated paths. There have been four algorithm versions developed for SONARR 
to achieve this task: the reality path string parsing algorithm [1], the in-memory single-threaded algorithm 
[2], the disk-writing multi-threaded algorithm [3], and the generic logic multi-compute algorithm, which 
is introduced in this next section. 
 
3.3.1. Generic Logic Multi-Compute 
 
There are two objectives for the current improvements to SONARR. The first is to implement multi-
compute functionality. The second is to upgrade the rule-fact logic to allow for more than just Boolean 
comparisons. Thus, the SONARR technology was enhanced to perform multi-threaded processing across 
multiple computers with an updated generic rule-fact logic. 
 
Multi-compute uses a relatively straightforward implementation. A system of request/response messages, 
over a TCP connection, was implemented to establish communication between a control node and worker 
nodes. The control node manages all of the connected workers and every worker request is handled by it. 
The worker nodes’ only job is to process the work given to them and return completed paths. 
 
The generic fact logic is more complicated because it requires fact values to be able to represent integers, 
decimals, strings, Boolean values, and other types. This required that the binary comparison system be 
transformed into an all-encompassing type comparison system. In addition to equality confirmation (==, 
!=), the new logic provides handling functionality for all comparison operators (<, >, <=, >=) and for 
performing simple calculations (+, -, *, /) on both constants and variables, before and after comparison 
operations. Basically, the logic needed expansion to better represent the real world. 
 

The generic logic multi-compute algorithm used in the expansion of SONARR, which is presented in this 
paper, is discussed in two parts: first multi-compute is discussed in Section 3.3.1.1, then the generic logic 
is presented in Section 3.3.1.2. 
 
3.3.1.1. Multi-Compute 
 
The multi-compute algorithm uses a client/server approach where a single control node acts as a server 
for the worker nodes that process work through jobs utilizing multi-threaded techniques. 
 
The worker SONARR executables are started individually through the command line and require the IP 
address and port of the control node they will be communicating with. The worker attempts to connect to 
the control node. On the control node, the user creates a scenario, enters the IP addresses and ports of the 
worker nodes, and starts the processing. The scenario data is sent to each worker, where the worker parses 
it and initializes its processing tasks. 
 
The processing tasks are created and stored in a manager object that each node initializes. The tasks 
asynchronously handle assignments within the node, such as requesting additional work, handling work 
requests from other nodes, load balancing for the multi-threaded algorithm, and reporting/writing 
completed paths (dependent on node type). The manager initializes a specified number of multithread 
jobs (the default configuration is the number of processors in the node minus one) which run the 
SONARR logic on reality paths. Each job has a backlog of queued work that it processes and a collection 
for storing the completed paths that are found. Supplying work and handling completed paths, within each 
job, is done by the manager’s processing task. Figures 11 and 12 depict the workflow of the processing 
tasks in a manager for a control node and a worker node, respectively. 
 

 
Figure 11. Simplified depiction of task delegation and workflow within the manager of a control node. 
 

 
Figure 12. Simplified depiction of task delegation and workflow within the manager of a worker node. 
 
The requesting task’s purpose is to request work from other nodes, if its jobs are idle (i.e., they have an 
empty backlog and are not actively processing a path). It confirms that every job in the node is waiting for 
work and begins iterating through its directly connected nodes to request paths. Each neighboring node is 
queried until it exhausts the list or receives paths. Any received paths are added to the requesting node’s 
first job, to be distributed by the load balancer. Figure 13 illustrates this process. 
 
 
Figure 13. Flowchart of the request work task. 
 

The handle requested work task (also called the outgoing work task) gets backlogged paths from its local 
node and sends them to another node. It does this by checking to see if there is an outgoing buffer that 
needs to be filled. These buffers are created when the node receives a request for more work. If buffers 
needing to be filled are identified, the outgoing work task attempts to fill them. This involves trying to 
take half of the total backlogged paths (half of the work of each job) and pushing it into the buffer. The 
buffer is then released and whatever it contains, empty or not, is sent to the requesting node. Figure 14 
illustrates this process. 
 
 
Figure 14. Flowchart of the outgoing work task. 
 
The load balancing task takes half the work from the node’s first job and distributes it to the rest of the 
jobs. Originally, the task evenly split work between all jobs that needed it, but this was too time 
consuming (as it required calculating which jobs were idle and how much work to give each one). 
Instead, using repeated attempts of taking half of the first job’s backlog and giving it to another job was 
shown to be much faster and more reliable. Figure 15 illustrates the load balancing task’s process. 
 
 
Figure 15. Flowchart of the load balancing task. 

 
Another key task is the reporting task. The reporting task is only implemented within worker nodes. This 
task sends completed paths from the worker node to the control node. A maximum transfer size was 
established, so that the data sent cannot overflow buffers or the control node’s general memory. Figure 16 
illustrates the worker’s reporting task process. 
 
 
Figure 16. Flowchart of the worker’s reporting task. 
 
The writing task is, conversely, implemented only within control nodes. It has two components: the 
copying element, and the writing element. The copying element continuously pulls completed path data 
and attempts to push it to a large buffer. If the data it is trying to add overflows the buffer, then the buffer 
array’s contents are copied to a temporary array and that temporary array is added to the writing 
collection. The large buffer is cleared, the new data is added, and the process continues. An index 
associated with each reality path stores the path data’s starting position within the destination file for 
individual path retrieval. These indexes are part of the same process that the completed path data follows. 
However, the indexes are written to a separate file and are used to read from the path data file in sections. 
 
The writing element is small. It constantly takes index/path data arrays from the copy element and writes 
them to the appropriate files. The goal of the writing task is to create large buffers so that large chunks of 
data can be written, with one write operation, to the disk. Experimentation showed that writing path data 
individually created a bottleneck waiting for the write operation. Figure 17 illustrates the writing task 
process. 
 

 
Figure 17. Flowchart of the control’s path writing task. 
 
The load balancing task has a check that the control node accesses. This check determines if all of the 
jobs within the node are empty and if all workers have an empty status. Empty worker status is recorded 
by the control node when a worker requests paths and the control replies with an empty array, meaning 
that the worker is still empty. The control node’s load balancing task’s check sees this, along with the 
empty jobs within the control itself, and trips the cancellation token. All jobs and processing tasks (except 
the control’s writing tasks) read this cancellation token and exit their loops. 
 
Once processing is cancelled by the control node and the loops end, a cancellation message is sent to each 
worker, one-by-one. This is done iteratively so that the worker nodes can gather any remaining completed 
paths and send them to the control. The control pushes these remaining paths to the writing task, which 
hasn’t stopped because it’s stopping criteria is not based on the cancellation token. Once all workers have 
confirmed their finished status, the control closes the completed paths collection that the writing task pulls 
from. This prevents anything else from being added to the collection and signals to the writing task that, 
once it is empty, it can stop. Finally, while the writing task finishes, a metric collection task is initialized 
to retrieve the processing data collected by each worker. One-by-one the metric data is transferred and the 
metric collection task agglomerates its data with the incoming data. The entire multi-compute algorithm is 
complete once the writing is finished for both the completed path data and the agglomerated metric data. 
 
3.3.1.2. Generic Logic 
 
This section discusses the changes to the logic system and how they affect the SONARR algorithm. 
 
3.3.1.2.1. Features 
 
The new SONARR algorithm facilitates the creation and management of complex rules. Previously, fact 
values could only be true or false, with rules checking and modifying the Boolean values. This Boolean-
only logic limited the modeling of device properties and interactions by forcing every property or cause-
effect relationship to be represented by a single or combination of several Boolean values. The new 
generic logic allows the representation of a device property as a Boolean, integer, decimal, or string value. 

Rule pre- and postconditions can, thus, require facts to have certain Boolean, integer, decimal, or string 
values. Boolean and string values must be either equal or not equal to a certain value. Integer and decimal 
values must be equal to, not equal to, greater than, greater than or equal to, less than, or less than or equal 
to a certain value. 
 
The new SONARR algorithm also handles variants differently. Facts are the only objects that can be 
variants, as they are used in reality paths to store the values that are produced by rule outputs (i.e., the 
changes). The base network is read-only, since it is shared between all paths during processing. Thus, 
when a fact’s value is altered, the corresponding fact object in the network is not modified. Instead, the 
fact is cloned into the reality path’s collection of active variant facts and the variant represents the change 
in the network. If the fact is altered again, later in processing, that alteration is applied to the active 
variant fact stored in the reality path. This process is shown in Figure 18. 
 
If facts are created during scenario processing—which is explained later in this section—these new facts 
are added to the reality path and not the base network. 
 
When the algorithm accesses a fact object, the reality path’s active variants are checked first. If no active 
variant fact is found, the base network is queried, and the original read-only fact is returned. An active 
variant can be retrieved by either a fact ID (shown in Figure 19) or both an entity ID and a property ID 
(shown in Figure 20), facilitating the retrieval of condition requirements. 
 
 
Figure 18. Altering a fact’s value. 
 
 
Figure 19. Retrieving a fact by the fact’s ID. 
 

 
Figure 20. Retrieving a fact by the ID of a containing entity and the fact’s CPID. 
 
The pre- and post-ignore parameters, which provide the ability for a rule to ignore required pre- and 
postconditions, if they are not found, were also modified. The options are dependent on what is to be 
skipped. Facts may be skipped when applying postconditions, such that the specified facts’ values are 
never altered. Common property identifiers can also be specified, and all facts with the specified common 
property identifier will not be altered. 
 
Common property identifiers can also be set to be created if missing (referred to as ‘post-create’). When 
retrieving a postcondition’s target fact ID from a reality path, if a fact with the specified common property 
identifier (CPID) is not present in the specified location, and the CPID is in the post-create list, then a fact 
is created with that CPID. This process is shown in Figure 21. This fact will be placed only in the active 
variants list—not the base network—as it is associated with only the individual reality path. 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Adding a post-create fact. 
 
Preconditions can also be configured to be skipped in the scenario parameters. By default, when a reality 
path does not have a fact required by a precondition, the corresponding rule is immediately disregarded, 
as its requirements cannot be satisfied. If the precondition is set to be skipped, however, and the required 
fact cannot be found, then the algorithm immediately stops evaluating that precondition and continues 
with the next precondition in the rule. This allows granularity when testing and during rule creation, as 

certain preconditions can be configured to be evaluated only if their requirements are present, rather than 
requiring the user to create multiple rules that have the same postconditions and manage them within the 
rule selection menu. 
 
The active variant facts system is an area of potential improvement in the future. The current system is 
not as efficient as it could be, in terms of memory usage, processing, and I/O operations. When active 
variant facts’ values are altered, they remain in the active variants collection within the reality path, even 
if the new value matches the corresponding fact’s value in the base network. Thus, the active variant facts 
collection of every reality path only grows in size, and possibly holds facts with the same ID and value as 
facts in the base network. This may have history preservation benefits, but it increases the memory 
required by SONARR. 
 
In order to facilitate accessing active variants by either their fact ID or by the IDs of their containing 
entity and CPID, both types of reference keys must be created to point to the same active variant fact 
object. In order to associate an entity ID and CPID to an active variant fact ID, the base entity is retrieved 
from the base network and its facts are iterated through, looking for the matching CPID. Since facts are 
referenced only by ID, when applying postcondition alterations, and an active variant fact is created upon 
the fact’s first alteration, active variant facts are initially only referenced by the fact ID. The entity-
common property entry is only added later, when the active variant is referenced by an entity-common 
property key. There is a processing impact, due to this, because of a subsequently discussed comorbid 
issue. Most of the entity-CPID entries are lost during serialization, resulting in this referencing work 
needing to be done many times. 
 
I/O utilization is also not currently optimized. During development, the entity-common property entries 
for active variant facts were included during reality path serialization. This led to I/O bottlenecking, due 
to the tremendous amount of serialization and deserialization done by SONARR during processing. To 
mitigate this, only entity-common property entries pertaining to post-create facts are serialized, as they 
cannot be found in the base network. The way active variant facts are stored and retrieved is an area of 
potential future development, to improve RAM, CPU, and I/O efficiency. 
 
The genericism aspect of fact values and pre-/postconditions would also benefit from further future 
expansion. Fact types could be added that use values of new object types. New object types would have 
their own requirements for comparison. For example, an object type representing the version of an 
operating system could be compared with less than and greater than operators. Given that a user may want 
to represent these values as strings but compare them in use case specific ways, conditions could be 
expanded on by allowing comparators to be overridden during creation. 
 
3.3.1.2.2. Algorithm Enhancements 
 
When the SONARR algorithm evaluates a connection within a reality path, it iterates through the rules in 
the order specified in the scenario parameters. It continues to the next reality path connection evaluation 
immediately upon a traversal rule triggering, or it halts the reality path completely, upon the failure to 
satisfy any rule evaluation. Additionally, evaluation is halted if the number of non-traversal rules 
triggered in the connection exceeds the maximum set in the scenario parameters. This means that no 
traversal rules were triggered and the reality path is stalled. This rule evaluation process has been changed 
to accommodate the generic logic. 
 
Rule precondition assessment involves iterating through the rule’s preconditions. For the rule to trigger, 
all preconditions must be satisfied. To satisfy a precondition, every requirement must match a fact, and 
the precondition’s expression must evaluate to true. However, a precondition may be skipped if SONARR 
fails to find a required fact and this fact is in the scenario parameters’ precondition ignore-if-missing list. 

 
Rule postcondition assessment involves three parts, which are now described. 
 
First, the algorithm gets the target facts from the reality path. Postconditions can either have one target 
fact—specified by a fact ID or by an entity ID and CPID—or several target facts, in which case all facts 
with the specified CPID are targeted. If a target fact is not found in an entity, but it is present in the 
scenario parameters’ CPID post-create list, then the fact is created and added to the reality path’s active 
variants list. If no target facts are found, the postcondition is skipped. 
 
Second, the algorithm gets the fact values required for the postcondition expression. These facts must be 
present in the reality path. To ensure this, rule preconditions can be used to check for these facts. A 
precondition that exists to verify the presence of a postcondition should not be put into the precondition 
ignore-if-missing list. 
 
Finally, the postcondition expression is evaluated, and the resulting value is set for the target facts. The 
target facts collected earlier are iterated through. A fact is skipped if it is in the fact post-ignore list or if 
the fact’s CPID is in the CPID post-ignore list. Otherwise, the fact ID is used to create a variant fact 
within the reality path. This variant fact receives the postcondition’s result value. 
 
After all of the postconditions for a rule are applied, the entities in the current connection are updated 
with the active variants from the reality path. While the active variants are used by the algorithm, the 
connections need to store a snapshot of the active variants for later visualization. 
 
4. Experimentation 
 
The experiments in this section utilize network models to demonstrate and evaluate the expanded generic 
logic assessment functionality. Performance tests were also conducted to compare previous SONARR 
versions’ multi-threaded, single-compute Boolean logic with the new multi-threaded, multi-compute 
generic logic. Those tests are also presented in this section. 
 
4.1. Generic Logic Experimentation 
 
Two networks were used to illustrate a vulnerability labeling use case. The first example, model 1, is a 
relatively simple network that starts at a container representing a common room in which four computers 
are stationed. Each of these computers has two facts that represent the name and version of a software 
instance on it. The rules assess the values of the facts within these computers against predefined 
vulnerability requirements and label them with corresponding fictitious CVEs. This labeling is performed 
by creating a fact in the vulnerable container with a common property identifier representing the CVE. A 
depiction of model 1 is shown in Figure 22. 
 

 
Figure 22. Depiction of model 1. 
 
The second example, model 2, has a configuration of four computers connected to a database, with one of 
the computers being an administrative terminal for the database. Three real CVEs were simplified and 
implemented in this model’s ruleset. A depiction of model 2 is shown in Figure 23. 
 
 
Figure 23. Depiction of model 2. 
 
These networks demonstrate the flexibility of the SONARR network objects and the new logic. The 
underlying objects are generic and allow a user to pursue many avenues when modeling a network for 
analysis. The detail level of the network is up to the designer. 
 
The initial development and testing of this technology showed that the modeling process can be difficult 
for humans to accomplish effectively. This indicates that making improvements to the modeling system 
could be an important area for future work. 
 
4.2. Multi-Compute Experimentation 
 
To test the implementation of the updated multi-compute algorithm, three scenarios for a large network 
from [3] were run using the algorithm, with and without using the multi-compute functionality, to 
compare the processing performance of the old Boolean logic and the new generic logic. This network 
will be referred to as model 3 and is shown in Figure 24. 
 

 
Figure 24. Depiction of model 3. 
 
The model 3 network was designed for a performance test in [3]. It has only two rules: one to cross a link 
normally, and one to cross a link while closing it. Each link in the network has a fact indicating its open 
or closed status, which is changed to false when the second rule traverses it. Changing link facts to false, 
before running a scenario, allows SONARR to process specific sections of the network. Different sections 
of the network contain different connection architectures, allowing for varying traversal patterns, 
behaviors, and performances. Table 1 describes the three scenarios from [3] that were used to test the new 
logic and multi-compute. 
 
Table 1. Previous scenarios for model 3 to test in the new logic and multi-compute. 
 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
Scenario 3 
Start Container 
Container 22 
Container 1 
Container 1 
End Container 
Container 29 
Container 11 
Container 15 
Configuration 
F57: F 
F30, F33, F38: F 
-- 
Description 
“big umbrella” 
“middle section” 
“whole network” 
 
Figures 25 to 27 illustrate the sections scenario 1, 2, and 3 processed, respectively. 
 
Figure 25. The ‘big umbrella’ processed in scenario 1. 
 

 
Figure 26. The ‘middle section’ processed in scenario 2. 
 
 
Figure 27. The ‘whole network’ processed in scenario 3. 
 
5. Results & Discussion 
 
Models 1 and 2 were run in SONARR from their start container to their end container. The models were 
designed with specific results anticipated and their correctness was manually validated. 
 
Running model 1 from container ‘In’ to container ‘Out’ produces 65 final paths. The longest paths–with 
10 connections and 12 triggered rules–are the important ones for this use case. These paths show the 
algorithm traversing from the ‘In’ container, through Room 138 to each PC, and then back out to Room 
138, before reaching the ‘Out’ container. 
 
During the visits to each PC, a rule assesses the two facts inside the entity: the software and the 
SoftwareVersion. For the CVE rule to trigger, the entity must contain a software fact with a string value 
of “FileSharez” and a SoftwareVersion fact with a decimal value of 11.2 or less. If those conditions are 
met, the postcondition runs and sets the CVE-2024-28394 common property identifier within the entity to 
true. It is important to note that, if there is not a fact with this common property identifier present, then 
nothing happens. Therefore, at the beginning of the SONARR run, a setting is configured to tell the 
algorithm to create a fact, if the CVE common property is not present in the postcondition’s destination. 
 
For model 1, only two PCs, out of the four, contain a CVE fact: PC-1 and PC-2. All the relevant paths 
met this criterion. Figures 28 to 31 illustrate the route taken by one of these paths. Additionally, Figures 
31 and 30 show PC-1 and PC-2, respectively, with the expected CVE fact. Figures 29 and 28 show PC-3 
and PC-4, respectively, without the CVE fact. 
 

 
Figure 28. PC-4 container without the CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 1 results. 
 
 
Figure 29. PC-3 without the CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 1 results. 
 
 
Figure 30. PC-2 container with the CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 1 results. 
 
 
Figure 31. PC-1 container with the CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 1 results. 
 
Model 2 has the same network configuration as model 1, so running model 2 from the ‘In’ container to 
the ‘Out’ container produces 65 final paths. Like model 1, the important paths for this case are again the 
longest paths, with 10 connections and 14 triggered rules. CVE-2024-43491, which identifies Windows 
10 builds before 10240.20526 as vulnerable, is applicable to two PCs: PC-01 and PC-02. Additionally, 

there are two CVEs applicable to the admin terminal 1 entity. The first, CVE-2024-6409, identifies a 
vulnerability within an OpenSSH server, if it’s version is between 8.7 and 8.8. The second, CVE-2024-
218007, identifies a vulnerability of the Linux operating system for Intel(R) Ethernet Network Adaptors 
before version 28.3. 
 
Manually analyzing the paths shows that SONARR successfully marked the vulnerable entities. Figures 
32 to 35 illustrate the route SONARR took for one of the paths and the CVEs established for the 
vulnerable entities. Figure 32 shows that PC-03, which was not vulnerable to CVE-2024-43491, was not 
labeled with the vulnerability fact. Figure 34 shows the vulnerable PC-01 with its CVE fact, and Figure 
33 shows the same for PC-02. Figure 35 shows the admin terminal having two CVE facts, one for the 
Intel network adaptor on the Linux operating system and the other for the vulnerable OpenSSH server. 
Table 2 provides the results for the two tests, including the general parameters set for each run, the 
completion time, and the final paths found by SONARR. 
 
 
Figure 32. PC-03 container without a CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 2 results. 
 
 
Figure 33. PC-02 container with the correct CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 2 results. 
 
 
Figure 34. PC-01 container with the correct CVE fact in the relevant path from the model 2 results. 
 

 
Figure 36. Admin Terminal container with the two correct CVE facts in the relevant path from the model 
2 results. 
 
Table 2. Processing results for the vulnerability labeling examples. 
Test 
Model 
Parameters 
Time 
Final Paths 
1 
1 
Create fact(s) on postcondition 
- 
CVE-2024-28394 
00:00:00:01 
65 
2 
2 
Create facts(s) on postcondition 
- 
CVE-2024-43491 
- 
CVE-2024-6409 
- 
CVE-2024-218007 
00:00:00:01 
65 
 
The point of these example network models is to demonstrate that, depending on how the network is 
configured, rules can be created using the implemented generic logic to match the prerequisites of CVEs 
in a more human readable way, as compared to the Boolean-only logic previously used. These CVE rules 
can then be used with a network model that consists of fact values of any kind (e.g., strings, decimals, 
Boolean, integers) to identify potential vulnerabilities within the system that the model represents. This is 
important as, the more human usable the framework is, the more intuitive and expandable the models are. 
 
5.1. Multi-Compute Results 
 
This section presents the results of the multi-compute testing. The multi-compute tests all use four nodes: 
one controller and three workers. The test results for scenario 1 are presented in Table 3. The test results 
for scenario 2 are presented in Table 4. Finally, processing times for Boolean logic using the single-
compute algorithm (from [3]) and generic logic using the multi-compute algorithm are presented in Table 
5. The results for scenario 3 are discussed subsequently. 
 
Table 3. Processing results for ten scenario 1 (“big umbrella”) runs. See Table 1. 
Test 
Processing Time 
Controller 
Results 
Worker 1 
Results 
Worker 2 
Results 
Worker 3 
Results 
TOTAL 
1 
24m 51s 
3,355,322 
2,145,351 
2,239,083 
2,124,345 
9,864,101 
2 
24m 55s 
3,392,609 
2,299,462 
2,148,244 
2,023,786 
9,864,101 
3 
27m 23s 
3,482,867 
2,326,982 
2,087,672 
1,966,580 
9,864,101 
4 
24m 58s 
3,359,212 
2,246,733 
2,312,999 
1,945,157 
9,864,101 
5 
24m 52s 
3,345,363 
2,313,929 
2,159,558 
2,045,251 
9,864,101 
6 
25m 2s 
3,273,588 
2,132,786 
2,158,043 
2,299,684 
9,864,101 
7 
27m 17s 
3,689,988 
1,962,789 
2,050,266 
2,161,058 
9,864,101 
8 
24m 54s 
3,306,904 
2,209,095 
2,163,881 
2,184,221 
9,864,101 
9 
28m 1s 
3,497,338 
2,186,681 
2,073,331 
2,106,751 
9,864,101 
10 
27m 3s 
3,674,387 
2,027,269 
2,065,346 
2,097,099 
9,864,101 

AVG 
~25m 55s 
3,437,758 
2,185,108 
2,145,842 
2,095,393 
9,864,101 
 
Scenarios 1 and 2 had a natural limit on the number of possible paths they could find: 9,864,101 paths and 
185,913 paths, respectively. Therefore, the processing time for these scenarios is the metric to focus on. 
The averages in Table 3 show that in scenario 1 final paths were found across the worker nodes somewhat 
evenly, and the workers managed to find all 9,864,101 paths in just under 26 minutes. The averages in 
Table 4 show a similar result for scenario 2, where the system found all 185,913 paths in just over a 
minute. 
 
Table 4. Processing results for ten Scenario 2 (“middle section”) runs. See Table 1. 
Test 
Processing Time 
Controller 
Results 
Worker 1 
Results 
Worker 2 
Results 
Worker 3 
Results 
TOTAL 
1 
1m 4s 
106,156 
33,208 
16,646 
29,903 
185,913 
2 
1m 4s 
84,315 
59,985 
1,640 
39,973 
185,913 
3 
1m 3s 
86,337 
57,963 
1,650 
39,963 
185,913 
4 
1m 6s 
108,395 
20,671 
42,618 
14,229 
185,913 
5 
1m 2s 
85,774 
3,793 
56,119 
40,227 
185,913 
6 
1m 5s 
88,975 
36,255 
49,054 
11,629 
185,913 
7 
1m 2s 
104,278 
3,311 
40,077 
38,247 
185,913 
8 
1m 5s 
85,434 
10,737 
33,939 
55,803 
185,913 
9 
1m 4s 
87,650 
49,316 
8,874 
40,073 
185,913 
10 
1m 2s 
87,886 
5,658 
40,043 
52,326 
185,913 
AVG 
~1m 3s 
92,520 
28,090 
29,066 
36,237 
185,913 
 
Table 5. Scenario 1 and 2 processing times for Boolean logic tests and new generic logic tests. 
Scenario 
Final Paths 
Single-Compute 
Multi-Compute 
Boolean Logic 
Generic Logic 
1 
9,864,101 
9m 3s 
1h 3m 45s 
25m 55s 
2 
185,913 
18s 
1m 37s 
1m 3s 
 
The time comparisons in Table 5 show that the Boolean logic is much faster, as expected. It also shows 
that there is a significant increase in processing time when using generic logic in single-compute, and 
there is a comparable decrease experienced when using multi-compute for the generic logic, both of 
which are also expected. While the Boolean logic is faster, it does not provide the expandability that the 
generic logic does. The multi-compute capabilities can bring the generic logic processing times to speeds 
similar to that of the Boolean logic, albeit requiring more computing resources to do so. 
 
The scenario 3 performance tests are presented in Table 7. Only five tests were performed, as each one 
takes 24 hours to complete. 
 
Table 7. Processing times for various Scenario 3 (“whole network”) runs. See Table 1. 
Test 
Processing Time 
Controller 
Results 
Worker 1 
Results 
Worker 2 
Results 
Worker 3 
Results 
TOTAL 
1 
24h 
26,078,037 
0 
0 
0 
26,078,037 
2 
24h 
19,289,151 
0 
14,354,146 
0 
33,643,297 
3 
24h 
26,414,514 
0 
0 
0 
26,414,514 
4 
24h 
28,061,163 
0 
0 
34,244,092 
62,305,255 
5 
24h 
31,001,387 
0 
5 
0 
31,001,392 
AVG 
24h 
26,168,850 
0 
2,870,830 
6,848,818 
35,888,499 
 

Due to the architectural nature of the model network used in this scenario, the initial paths provided to 
each worker node dictated whether it found final paths or not. In some cases, the workers receive work 
and process billions of potential paths, yet do not find a single path from C1 to C15. The multi-compute is 
doing its job, but the task is too large to complete. This is expected, as this scenario has no logic to cull 
potential paths during processing; it simply attempts to find every path from C1 to C15. This lack of 
found paths from workers is not seen in scenario 1 or 2, because the processed areas are significantly 
smaller in those scenarios. 
 
With that said, over the course of five 24-hour runs, the controller was shown to find results in every test, 
averaging 26,168,850 final paths. Worker 1 only processed unfruitful paths, averaging zero final paths, 
worker 2 averaged 2,870,830 final paths, and worker 3 averaged 6,848,818. The overall average final 
paths found across these five tests is 35,888,499. These results are slightly greater than the results from 
the multi-threaded, single-compute Boolean logic presented in [3]. The increase in the number of paths 
processed behind-the-scenes means that, if run to completion, the multi-compute generic logic would 
finish earlier than the other algorithm for larger workloads. The results for these two algorithms is 
presented in Table 8. 
 
Table 8. Scenario 3 results for Boolean logic test and new generic logic test. 
Scenario 
Processing Time 
Single-Compute Boolean Logic 
Multi-Compute Generic Logic 
3 
24h 
24,278,791 
35,888,499 
 
The average results that each node collected during the multi-compute runs for each of model 3’s 
scenarios are presented in Table 9. These averages show the multi-compute implementation successfully 
distributed and processed work across the workers, which is important to remember when assessing the 
empty workers’ results for the third scenario. 
 
Table 9. Average results data for the tests on multi-compute performance scenarios. 
Scenari
o 
Tests 
Time 
Controller 
Results 
Worker 1 
Results 
Worker 2 
Results 
Worker 3 
Results 
Total 
1 
10 
~25m 55s 
3,437,758 
2,185,108 
2,145,842 
2,095,393 
9,864,101 
2 
10 
~1m 3s 
92,520 
28,090 
29,066 
36,237 
185,913 
3 
5 
24h 
26,168,850 
0 
2,870,830 
6,848,818 
35,888,499 
 
6. Conclusions & Future Work 
 
This paper has provided an overview and evaluation of the updates to the SONARR technology. A new 
generic logic capability was added to the rule-fact system, allowing facts in networks to be created with 
any value type (e.g., Boolean, string, integer, and decimal), making the model creation and result analysis 
more human understandable and intuitive. The presented examples and experimentation demonstrate the 
possible applications and expandability achievable via this method of system modeling. 
 
Second, the algorithm’s performance was improved through the implementation of multi-compute 
functionality. The multi-compute algorithm was shown to decrease processing time for large workloads, 
because of an increase in available processing resources. Notably, it increases the processing time for 
small workloads, which is not surprising as the multi-compute implementation adds computational 
overhead. 
 
Areas for potential future work include exploring connection bypassing for logically linked entities, so 
that rules can assess two containers without having to unnecessarily incorporate relay devices between 

them. Future work could also explore the benefits of using AI to make informed, trajectory-influencing 
decisions during processing, and integrate STIG configurations to facilitate network creation and 
verification.