Threshold Signatures as-a-Service: Achieving
Threshold ML-DSA in One Online Round
Matthieu Rambaud1, Sascha Roth1, and Antoine Urban2
1 T´el´ecom Paris
2 Dfns
Abstract. We formally define Threshold Signatures as-a-Service (TSaaS),
in which the honest parties performing the threshold signature respond
only to the signing requests of a designated client. This model captures
the mainstream industrial use case of threshold signatures which is to
implement Wallets as-a-Service.
This new model allows for optimizations of existing threshold signa-
ture schemes, in particular in the lattice setting. As a particularly rele-
vant case study, we describe a TSaaS variant of the Threshold ML-DSA
scheme from [Celi et al., USENIX’26], called ML-DSaaS, which combines
the first two rounds into a single message-independent round that can
be pre-processed before the message is known. We first describe a sim-
ple version of ML-DSaaS in a model where the client is semi-honest. We
then upgrade the construction to withstand a possibly corrupt client,
by leveraging existence of a coordinating machine which is present in
all real-life deployments of TSaaS. This machine, dubbed the Relayer,
filters the requests of the client to the parties and centralizes the commu-
nications between them. We provide an implementation of our scheme
together with experimental benchmarks. The online phase of our scheme
is two to three times faster than the one of [Celi et al., USENIX’26].
Our modification carries over unchanged to many similar threshold sig-
nature schemes, provided they are used in the TSaaS setting.
1
Introduction
Threshold signatures. Threshold signatures are protocols allowing a group
of parties to collectively generate a valid signature, such that a threshold num-
ber of them (say, T out of N) are required to cooperate for signing, while the
signature remains unforgeable if an adversary controls up to T −1 parties. Re-
cently, there has been significant research interest in constructing lattice-based
threshold signature schemes, motivated by the need for post-quantum security.
See Table 1 for a comparison of such schemes. To the best of our knowledge,
no existing lattice-based threshold signature scheme simultaneously achieves all
Cette publication est sous la licence creative commons CC BY ND. Les formules et
algorithmes sont sous la licence APACHE 2.0.

three of the following desirable properties: (1) reasonable efficiency, (2) a single
online round, and (3) compatibility with a standard signature format. By online
round we refer to a round which can only be processed after the Client decides
the message to be signed.
Definitional contribution: TSaaS. Wallet-as-a-Service is a widely deployed
commercial concept [13, 31, 25, 17] — part of the digital-asset custody market,
which was worth over 600 billion dollars in 2024 and is expected to grow rapidly
in the coming years [20] — that has not so far been given a precise cryptographic
meaning. We take a first step by formalizing Threshold Signatures as-a-Service
(TSaaS) in Section 2.
In this model, a designated Client needs to quickly produce signatures but
does not store any secret material, even in cold memory. Instead, the Client
acts as the sole authorized initiator, sending authenticated requests to a sign-
ing service of N remote parties. The signing key is secret-shared among these
parties and never reconstructed in a single location. The service guarantees sig-
nature delivery if T of the N parties are honest. In the simplified model TSaaSsh
(Section 2), the Client is assumed to be semi-honest: the signature remains un-
forgeable even if the adversary controls up to T −1 parties and sees the entire
internal state of the Client. As described in below we then relax this assumption
in the full deployment model, in Section 4.
Beyond its definitional interest, the TSaaS setting enables concrete optimiza-
tions of lattice-based threshold signatures. In particular, it allows us to construct
practical lattice-based threshold signatures with a single online round: once the
message to be signed is known, no interaction between the parties is needed —
they just compute their partial signatures and output them. This efficiency goal
mirrors the pre-signature paradigm widely adopted in classical threshold schemes
(e.g., FROST [24] or threshold ECDSA [9, 23]), but replicating this performance
in the post-quantum setting without significant penalties has proven difficult.
Our one-round ML-DSA TSaaSsh scheme: ML-DSaaSsh. We adapt the Thresh-
old ML-DSA scheme from [10] (submitted to the NIST Threshold Call [26] un-
der the name Mithril) to the TSaaSsh setting. This scheme outputs standard,
NIST-compliant ML-DSA signatures (standardized by NIST in 2024) for N ≤6,
perfectly fitting industrial requirements. The original protocol has three rounds,
including two online rounds; our TSaaS architecture safely compresses these
into a single offline pre-processing round and one online signing round. This
transformation preserves all original parameters while reducing the final round’s
computational cost.
The crucial difference compared to existing schemes is that the Client includes
a fresh 256-bit random salt in each signing request. Since the adversary cannot
predict this salt, many consistency checks become unnecessary, and the first two
rounds of [10] collapse into a single message-independent preprocessing round.
The TSaaS setting is essential: in the usual threshold signature model, there is
no designated Client which can choose a common unpredictable salt for all the
parties. The resulting signatures are standard, unmodified ML-DSA signatures
2

Threshold
scheme
Online
rounds
Signature output
is a NIST standard
notes
[1, 6]
1
✓(supports any signature in theory)
a
[15, 33]
1
✗(Raccoon)
[11, 33]
1
✗(other)
[8] (Ringtail)
1
✗(Raccoon)
[5] (Quorus)
⩾10
✓(ML-DSA)
[21] (Olingo)
1
✗(Raccoon)
b
[10] (Mithril)
2
✓(ML-DSA)
[7] (Hermine)
1
✗(Raccoon)
c
[27] (THED)
2
✓(ML-DSA)
This work (TSaaS setting only)
1
✓(ML-DSA)
d
a No concrete instantiation; costs would be prohibitive when applied to ML-DSA.
b Only in the sequential setting and under a weaker security model, otherwise there are
3 online rounds.
c Provides identifiable aborts and proactive security.
d Most efficient scheme in the table in terms of communication and computation costs.
Table 1: Comparison of different lattice-based threshold signatures. For concise-
ness, we only include threshold signatures that either have a single online round,
or output standard signatures.
(see Section 3.4). We sketch our ML-DSaaSsh (ML-DSA-as-a-Service) below (the
full description can be found in Section 3):
• Key generation. Identical to [10]: N partial secret keys are created using
replicated secret sharing, either by a trusted dealer or by a DKG protocol.
• Pre-processing round. This single round replaces the first two rounds in
[10], and can be executed before the message is known. As in [10], parties
compute their nonces wi =
A I
· ri, but then they immediately reveal them
instead of first publishing commitments to them.
• Client request. This is where our TSaaS setting comes into play: the Client
creates a client request which contains a message to be signed, a set of nonces
obtained during the pre-processing round, and a set of T active parties, and a
256-bit random salt. In the basic presentation (Section 3.1), the Client gener-
ates the salt alone. Whereas in the full real-life deployment (Section 4) with
a coordinator called the Relayer R, then the Client’s salt is rerandomized by
a randomness committed by R in the preprocessing-then-revealed by R upon
forwarding the Client’s request.
• Online signing round. Upon receiving an authenticated client request, each
active party computes the challenge c by hashing the aggregated nonce w :=
P
j wj, the message and the salt, and outputs its response zi. As in ML-DSA,
parties perform rejection sampling, meaning that they can abort if their re-
sponse zi does not pass certain checks. Contrary to [10], parties do not verify
the other parties’ nonces, which significantly reduces computation.
• Signature aggregation. Once all active parties have computed their re-
sponses, they are aggregated into a standard ML-DSA signature (c, z = P
i zi, h).
The salt is not part of the signature; it is passed to the verifier as the FIPS 204
3

[16] context string ctx. Verification uses the unmodified FIPS 204 algorithm:
ML-DSA.Verify(vk, msg, σ, ctx). See Section 3.4 for details.
We prove unforgeability under the same assumptions and with the same
bound as [10, Theorem 2]; benchmarks in Section 5 show a 2 −3× speedup in
online latency. Our approach carries unchanged over similar threshold signature
schemes, e.g., [29] or [30], and could also be used to adapt discrete-log-based
Fiat-Shamir threshold signatures, though this is less compelling given existing
single-online-round solutions like FROST [24].
Remark 1 (Salting in digital signatures). Random salts appear in several non-
threshold signature schemes, e.g. RSA-PSS [2, 12], Picnic [28], SPHINCS+ [4]
(where it is called a randomizer), and Falcon [19]. Broadly speaking, the role of
the salt in such non-threshold schemes is either to allow for a tight security proof,
or to prevent various re-signing attacks. In contrast, in our threshold Fiat-Shamir
setting, the salt serves a structurally distinct role: it lets parties reveal nonces
before the message is known, which is what enables the round collapse. Without
it, known attacks against Fiat-Shamir signatures with pre-processing [14, 3, 22]
could be possible. At a very high level, these attacks consist in obtaining several
sets of pre-processing tokens (ppi)i, and then making several signing queries with
these sets of tokens and with well-chosen messages. The adversary can then forge
a signature on a new message by computing an appropriate linear combination
of the obtained signatures. In our construction, the salt prevents these attacks
(intuitively, this is because it randomizes the input of the random oracle in an
unpredictable way), and allows for a rigorous security proof.
Remark 2 (What happens if the Client is actively corrupt). By definition, a
threshold signing protocol cannot prevent a corrupt Client from requesting sig-
natures on messages of its choice; this is handled by orthogonal (typically non-
cryptographic) security layers such as access control and policy enforcement. It
can, however, ensure unforgeability on messages never queried by the Client.
Our ML-DSaaSsh scheme does not achieve this if the Client is actively corrupt:
it could choose the salt adaptively and potentially mount ROS-style attacks
[14, 3, 22] to forge signatures on unqueried messages. Next, we address this issue
by upgrading ML-DSaaSsh to ML-DSaaSr.
Full real-life deployment tolerating a corrupt Client: ML-DSaaSr. We
upgrade ML-DSaaSsh to tolerate the degraded scenario where the Client is cor-
rupt. To preserve the single online round, we leverage a structural feature of
real-world Wallet-as-a-Service deployments [13, 17]: the Client, C, and the sign-
ing parties do not communicate directly with each other, but through a Relayer
denoted R (also known as ”coordinator”) that serves as the system’s API gate-
way. This is the case in most deployments [25, 13], since signing parties typi-
cally run in isolated environments (HSMs, TEEs, or private networks) that are
not directly reachable by the Client (a mobile app, browser extension, or back-
end service) nor from each other. As is the standard practice in existing WaaS
deployments, the channels between the Client and the parties are end-to-end
4

authenticated through the Relayer: in practice, each signing request carries an
authentication signature σC that the parties verify, so that a corrupt Relayer can
drop or delay requests but cannot alter them.
We exploit this architecture to ensure salt unpredictability also in the de-
graded scenario where the Client C is corrupt. We call the resulting protocol
ML-DSaaSr; the full construction is given in Section 4. The two modifications
compared to ML-DSaaSsh are:
(i) The Relayer R commits to a random salt saltR during pre-processing. As
before, the Client provides a fresh salt in its signing request, which we now
denote saltC. Along with the forwarding of the signing request to the parties,
R reveals saltR. The salt used by the parties is then defined as the XOR sum
salt := saltC ⊕saltR.
(ii) R forwards at most one Client request cr = (sid, m, saltC) per (pre-processed)
session identifier sid.
Hence, the online signing phase protocol can be summarized by the following
diagram, where R is committed to saltR before seeing the saltC:
C
R
P1, . . . , PN
cr = (sid, saltC, msg)
cr & reveals saltR
As a result we obtain unforgeability as long as the Client C and the Relayer
R are not both actively corrupt, essentially because salt := saltC ⊕saltR remains
unpredictable to the adversary.
Table 2: Unforgeability under different corruption scenarios. We consider at most
T −1 party corruptions. We write ✓C (resp. ✗C) for an honest (resp. corrupt)
Client and ✓R (resp. ✗R) for an honest (resp. corrupt) Relayer. In the 2PC
row, R corresponds to the remote server.
Unforgeability
Scheme
Online
rounds
Client stores
secret
✓C ✓R ✓C ✗R ✗C ✓R ✗C ✗R
Delegated Mithril [10]
2
No
✓
✓
✓
✓
2PC from [10]
2
Yes
✓
✓
✓
✗
ML-DSaaSr
1
No
✓
✓
✓
✗
Discussion and comparison. Our TSaaS model captures the Network Hosted
Key (NHK) paradigm, where all key shares are held by remote servers (e.g.,
Dfns [13]); this contrasts with the User Hosted Key (UHK) model (e.g., Fire-
blocks [17], Coinbase App [25], Zengo [32], Fordefi [18]), where the Client holds
an MPC key share. Table 2 compares three paradigms for threshold ML-DSA,
assuming at most T −1 party corruptions and a Relayer R: (a) Mithril [10]
used as a delegated signing service; (b) Mithril [10] in a 2-of-2 UHK deployment
between a Client and a single server, denoted ”2PC”; and (c) our ML-DSaaSr
5

scheme. Even when the Client is corrupt, ML-DSaaSr retains unforgeability as
long as the Relayer is honest, matching the guarantees of 2PC. See Table 2 for
a comparison of the guarantees provided by these three paradigms.
2
Formal definitions
In this section, we provide a new syntax and new correctness and unforgeability
definitions in order to model Threshold Signatures as-a-Service. We first formal-
ize a simplified model, denoted TSaaSsh, which assumes a semi-honest Client.
2.1
Syntax
We adapt the syntax of a threshold signature from [10, Section 2.2]. For con-
creteness, we focus on schemes with one pre-processing round and one online
round; the syntax generalizes to more rounds. The significant change compared
to usual definitions is the explicit role of the Client.
Definition 1. A simplified Threshold Signature as-a-Service (TSaaSsh) is com-
prised of algorithms whose syntax is described below. We denote by act ⊆[N] a
set of T parties that take part in signing. Each party i maintains a local state
sti.
• Keygen(κ, N, T) →(vk, (ski)i∈[N]). Takes as input a security parameter κ, the
total number of parties N and the reconstruction threshold T ⩽N. Outputs a
verification key vk, and partial secret keys (ski)i∈[N].
• PP(i, sti) →(ppi, sti). The local pre-processing algorithm takes as input the
state sti of party i, and outputs a pre-processing token ppi and an updated
state sti.
• Client(msg, act, (ppi)i∈act) →cr. The Client creates a signing request cr based
on a message msg to be signed, a set of T active parties act, and the prepro-
cessing tokens (ppi)i∈act.
• PSign(vk, cr, i, ski, sti) →(sigi, sti). The partial signing algorithm takes as in-
put the verification key vk, a client request cr, and the secret key ski and the
state sti of user i. It outputs a partial signature sigi, and an updated state sti.
• Combine(vk, cr, (sigi)i∈act) →(sig, ctx). Takes as input the verification key
vk, the client request cr and the partial signatures output by active parties
(sigi)i∈act. Outputs a final signature sig alongside a context string ctx.
• Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx) →1(accept)/0(reject). Takes as input a verification key
vk, a message msg, a signature sig and a context string ctx.
Remark 3. We instantiate Definition 1 for ML-DSA in Section 3, where Verify
is exactly the standard FIPS 204 [16] verification algorithm. Importantly, FIPS
204 also allows for a context string ctx which is signed together with the message.
We explicitly include ctx in our syntax because our construction makes essential
use of it.
6

2.2
Correctness
We adapt the correctness definition from [10, Definition A.4] to incorporate the
Client; as in [10], correctness (that any produced output is a valid signature)
is subsumed into p-termination, where p accounts for aborts due to rejection
sampling.
GameTS−corr
TS
(κ, N, T, msg, act)
1: (vk, (ski)i∈[N]) ←Keygen(κ, N, T)
2: for i ∈[N]
3:
sti := ∅
4: for i ∈act
5:
(ppi, sti) ←PP(i, sti)
6: cr ←Client(msg, act, (ppi)i∈act)
7: for i ∈act
8:
(sigi, sti) ←PSign(vk, cr, i, ski, sti)
9: if ∃i ∈act, sigi = ⊥
10:
return ⊥
11: (sig, ctx) := Combine(vk, cr, (sigi)i∈act)
12: return Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx)
Fig. 1: Correctness game for the 1-online round TSaaS scheme TS (with aborts).
Definition 2. Let TS be a TSaaSsh scheme. For any supported number of parties
N, threshold T, active set act ⊆[N] of size at least T, and message msg ∈{0, 1}∗,
we say that TS p-terminates (where p accounts for aborts during signing) if:
Pr[GameTS−corr
TS
(κ, N, T, msg, act) ̸= ⊥] ≥p (liveness)
Pr[GameTS−corr
TS
(κ, N, T, msg, act) = 0] = negl(κ) (correctness)
where GameTS−corr
TS
is defined in Figure 1.
Remark 4. Prop. 1 discusses p-termination for our ML-DSaaSsh instantiation. In
the full real-life deployment model with a Relayer (Section 4), liveness is not
guaranteed if the Relayer is corrupt because it could simply block all the traffic.
2.3
Unforgeability
In this simplified TSaaSsh model, and contrary to usual threshold signature defi-
nitions, the adversary does not interact with individual honest parties: all queries
go through oracles OPP and OClient, which enforce that all honest parties re-
ceive the same inputs. In more detail, we adapt the unforgeability definition
from [10, Definition A.3] as follows. The adversary corrupts up to T −1 parties
and receives their secret keys. The adversary can call the OClient oracle with
arbitrary message, set of active parties, and set of pre-processed nonces; the re-
sulting client request is forwarded to the honest parties, but the Client’s internal
7

workings remain outside the adversary’s control. The adversary wins if it forges
a valid signature on a message not previously queried to OClient. Note that in
the full real-life deployment model of Section 4 we will allow again the adversary
to interact with honest parties in the unforgeability definition. Specifically, the
parties will receive the Client’s requests forwarded by a possibly corrupt Relayer.
GameTS−UF
TS,A (κ, N, T)
1: Qmsg := ∅; Sessions := ∅
2: corrupt, stA ←A(κ, N, T)
3: assert corrupt ⊆[N] ∧|corrupt| < T
4: honest := [N]\corrupt
5: (vk, (ski)i∈[N]) ←Keygen(κ, N, T)
6: for i ∈honest
7:
sti := ∅
8: (msg, sig, ctx)
←
AH,OPP,OClient(stA, vk, (ski)i∈corrupt)
9: return (msg /∈Qmsg) ∧
Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx)
OPP(act)
1: assert |act| = T
2: for i ∈act ∩honest
3:
(ppi, sti) ←PP(i, sti)
4: Sessions := Sessions ∪
{(ppi)i∈act∩honest}
5: return (ppi)i∈act∩honest
OClient(act, msg, (ppi)i∈act)
1: Qmsg := Qmsg ∪{msg}
2: assert |act| = T
3: assert (ppi)i∈act∩honest ∈Sessions
4: Update Sessions := Sessions \ {(ppi)i∈act∩honest}
5: cr ←Client(msg, act, (ppi)i∈act)
6: for i ∈act ∩honest
7:
(sigi, sti) ←PSign(vk, cr, i, ski, sti)
8: return (cr, (sigi)i∈act∩honest)
Fig. 2: Unforgeability game for the TSaaS scheme TS. H denotes oracle access to
all the random oracles. If a call to PP or PSign fails (e.g. when rejection sampling
aborts), it returns ⊥; the oracle still returns the responses from the other honest
parties.
Definition 3. Let TS be a TSaaSsh scheme. The advantage of an adversary A
against the unforgeability of TS is defined as
AdvTS−UF
TS,A
:= Pr
h
GameTS−UF
TS,A (κ, N, T) = 1
i
(1)
where GameTS−UF
TS,A (κ, N, T) is defined in Figure 2. We say that TS is unforgeable
(in the random oracle model) if for all PPT adversaries A, AdvTS−UF
TS,A
⩽negl(κ).
OPP generates honest preprocessing tokens and stores them in Sessions. Each
OClient query must reference valid, unconsumed preprocessing tokens previously
8

established during an OPP query; sessions are consumed upon use, preventing
the adversary from reusing honest preprocessing states across different signing
attempts. One can observe that our definition guarantees unforgeability even if
the Client is passively corrupt, i.e., even if the adversary can observe its entire
internal state, since the Client does not have any secret material.
Use of Sessions. In practice, the Client collects (ppi)i∈act from all parties and
later uses them for a signing request. In the unforgeability game, Sessions stores
only the honest parties’ tokens, as the adversary can choose its own tokens adap-
tively, after seeing the honest ones. Equivalently, a more verbose but perhaps
more intuitive way to model this would have been to ask the adversary to send
its pre-processing tokens after having seen the honest ones, and then add all the
tokens in Sessions.
3
Threshold ML-DSA as-a-Service
In this section, we construct an ML-DSA TSaaS scheme, in the following sense:
Definition 4. A TSaaS scheme is an ML-DSA TSaaS scheme (ML-DSaaS) if
its verification algorithm is identical to the ML-DSA verification algorithm (i.e.
Algorithm 3 of FIPS 204 [16]).
3.1
Description of our simplified scheme ML-DSaaSsh
We first present our simplified scheme, ML-DSaaSsh, assuming a semi-honest
client and no relayer. It adapts [10] by combining the first two rounds into
a single message-independent round without nonce commitments. We use the
same notations as [10], and refer to it for the definitions of parameters (recalled
in Table 4) and helper algorithms.
Key generation. The key generation is identical to the one from [10]. It assumes a
trusted dealer to sample and distribute the shares using replicated secret sharing.
Pre-processing. This algorithm combines the first two rounds from [10]. Each
party samples randomness ri, computes its nonce wi and reveals it, without
committing to it and independently of the message.
Client request. The Client collects the nonces (wj)j∈act from the parties and
builds a request cr with a 256-bit random salt.
Signing. Each party retrieves ri from its state, and reads (wj)j∈act from the
request. Without verifying the other parties’ nonces (unlike [10]), it computes
the challenge c by hashing the aggregated nonce w, the message, and the salt.
Combining and verifying. Combine uses the salt to compute the challenge c and
outputs both the standard ML-DSA signature sig and the FIPS 204 context
string ctx. Verify uses the unmodified FIPS 204 algorithm taking ctx as input.
9

PP(i, sti)
1:
ri ←χr
2:
wi := 
A I
· ri
3:
sti := sti ∪{(wi, ri)}
4:
return (ppi := wi, sti)
Client(msg, act, (ppi)i∈act)
1: salt ←{0, 1}256
2: cr := (msg, act, (ppi)i∈act, salt)
3: return cr
PSign(vk, cr, i, ski, sti)
1: Parse (msg, act, (wj)j∈act, salt) := cr
2: assert i ∈act and ∃ri, (wi, ri) ∈sti
3: sti := sti\{(wi, ri)}
4: µ ∈{0, 1}512 := H tr||0x00||IntegerToBytes(|salt|, 1)||salt||msg
5: w := P
j∈cr.act wj
6: w⊤:= HighBits(w, 2γ2)
7: ˜c ∈{0, 1}256 = H(µ||w⊤); c := SampleInBall(˜c)
8: m := RSSRecover(cr.act)
9: spart
i
:= P
I∈mi sI
10: zi ←HRej(c · spart
i
, r, r′, ν, M; ri)
11: if zi = ⊥then abort
12: z(1)
i
, z(2)
i
:= z ∈Rl
q × Rk
q
13: return (sigi := z(1)
i
, sti)
Combine(vk = (ρ, t⊤), cr, (sigi)i∈cr.act) →(sig, ctx)
1: Parse cr.pp = (wi)i and (sigi)i = (z(1)
i
)i
2: ctx ←cr.salt
3: µ ∈{0, 1}512 := H tr||0x00||IntegerToBytes(|ctx|, 1)||ctx||cr.msg
4: w := P
i∈cr.act wi; w⊤:= HighBits(w, 2γ2)
5: ˜c := H(µ||w⊤)
6: c := SampleInBall(˜c)
7: z(1) := P
i∈cr.act z(1)
i
8: δ := w −(Az(1) −2dct⊤)
9: h := MakeHintq(δ, Az(1) −2dct⊤, 2γ2)
10: if
||z(1)||∞⩾γ1 −β or ||δ||∞> γ2 or ||h||1 > ω
11:
abort
12: return (sig := (˜c, z(1), h), ctx)
Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx) = ML-DSA.Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx)
1: A := ExpandA(ρ)
2: Parse sig := (˜c, z(1), h)
3: µ ∈{0, 1}512 := H tr||0x00||IntegerToBytes(|ctx|, 1)||ctx||msg
4: c := SampleInBall(˜c)
5: w′
⊤:= UseHintq(h, Az(1) −2dct⊤, 2γ2)
6: return ||z(1)||∞< γ1 −β and ˜c = H(µ||w′
⊤) and ||h||1 ⩽ω
Fig. 3: Description of ML-DSaaSsh. Gray lines are identical to [10], of which the
notation and parameters are recalled in Section B. Helper algorithms ExpandA,
Power2Round, HighBits, SampleInBall, RSSRecover, HRej, MakeHint and UseHint
are defined in [10].
10

3.2
Correctness
Proposition 1. ML-DSaaSsh p-terminates (in the sense of Definition 2) with
the same probability p as the threshold ML-DSA scheme from [10].
Proof sketch. When all parties are honest and no rejection sampling abort occurs,
the secret shares reconstruct the full signing key, so the aggregated response
satisfies the same algebraic verification equation as ML-DSA.Sign(sk, msg, ctx =
salt) and passes the same norm checks. Hence ML-DSA.Verify(vk, msg, sig, ctx =
salt) accepts. Neither of our two modifications affects correctness: the salt is
simply the FIPS 204 context string, which is hashed with the message both
during signing and verification; and the removed nonce commitments and cross-
verifications are only relevant when some parties misbehave, which does not
occur in the correctness game. The p-termination probability is therefore the
same as in [10]; the precise bound, together with the required assumptions on
the parameters, is stated in Section D.
3.3
Unforgeability
Theorem 1. Let A be an adversary against the unforgeability (Definition 3) of
the ML-DSaaSsh scheme making at most Qs calls to honest parties (we consider
that each call to OClient counts as |act ∩honest| calls to honest parties) and
QH calls to the random oracles H and SampleInBall. There exist adversaries Bs
against MLWEq,k,l,χs, Br against MLWEq,k,l,χr, Bz against MLWEq,k,l,χz, and
BUF against the unforgeability of ML-DSA running in time TBs ≈TBr ≈TBz ≈
TBUF ≈TA such that
AdvA ⩽2QHQs2−256 + Q2
H2−512 + Qs
M
M −1(AdvBr + AdvBz)+
Qs
M
M −1 ·
2ϵ
1 −ϵ +

1 +
ϵ
M −1
Qs
(2AdvBs + AdvBUF) + negl(κ)
Note that the advantage of the adversary is slightly smaller than in [10],
which allows us to safely use the same parameters as them.
The proof is very similar to the one from [10]. Hence, we only give an overview
of the proof, and we refer to Section E for the complete proof. As usual, we define
a series of hybrids in order to progressively simulate the honest parties without
their signing keys.
Game1.
This is the unforgeability game.
Game2.
Here, our TSaaS setting comes into play. At each pre-processing query,
the challenger samples a challenge c and its seed ˜c. Then, when the adversary
makes a signing query for the corresponding session, the challenger programs
H(µ||w⊤) := ˜c and SampleInBall(˜c) := c. Recall that w⊤denotes the high bits
of the aggregated nonce w, and µ is obtained by hashing the message with
the public key and the salt. The random salt ensures that with overwhelming
probability, the adversary will not already have queried the random oracle H on
11

the same input (µ||w⊤), making this game indistinguishable from the previous
one.
Game3 and Game4.
When the adversary makes a pre-processing query, the chal-
lenger still samples ˜c and c at random, and also samples the response zi for each
honest player i using the rejection sampling algorithm (as would normally be
done in the signing round). When the corresponding signing query arrives, the
challenger replays these cached values.
Game5 to Game7.
As in [10, Game 7-9]. During pre-processing queries, the
challenger computes the honest wi’s using the zi’s it has sampled. In case of a
rejected zi (i.e. zi = ⊥because of rejection sampling), wi is sampled uniformly.
Game8 to Game11.
As in [10, Game 10-13]. The challenger obtains an ML-DSA
public key, and uses it to run the unforgeability game without the secret keys.
In particular, the honest zi’s are sampled from an ideal distribution which is
independent from the secret keys.
Conclusion.
As in [10], we use a successful adversary against Game11 to forge
an ML-DSA signature.
3.4
FIPS 204 Compliance
The protocol outputs signatures strictly compliant with the NIST standard.
FIPS 204 defines the message representative as:
µ = H(tr ∥0x00 ∥IntegerToBytes(|ctx|, 1) ∥ctx ∥msg)
where ctx is an application-supplied context string of at most 255 bytes. Our
256-bit (32-byte) salt fits within this limit. Hence, the Client simply passes the
salt as the context string. The Combine algorithm (Figure 3) explicitly outputs
ctx ←salt. To verify, one calls the unmodified FIPS 204 verification algorithm:
ML-DSA.Verify(vk, msg, σ, ctx = salt)
The verifier must know the salt value, but this is not different from any FIPS
204 deployment with non-empty context string. In practice, the salt is transmit-
ted alongside the message as application-level metadata (e.g., in a transaction
header), exactly as any other context string would be.
Remark 5 (Embedding the salt in the message). If the application-level context
string ctx together with the 32-byte salt would exceed the 255-byte FIPS 204
limit, the Client can instead embed the salt into the message: parties sign msg′ =
salt∥msg, and the verifier calls the standard ML-DSA.Verify(vk, msg′, sig, ctx).
Correctness now holds with respect to msg′ rather than msg. Security is unaf-
fected, since the salt adds the same 256 bits of entropy to µ regardless of its
position in the hash input. A detailed discussion is given in Section C.
4
Full real-life deployment tolerating a corrupt Client
In this section we specify and analyze the ML-DSaaSr protocol, which is an
extension of ML-DSaaSsh, which now tolerates a corrupt Client C. It preserves the
12

targeted properties of ML-DSaaSsh: it has a single online round, outputs standard
ML-DSA signatures, and remains highly efficient. In order to preserve the single
online round, we leverage a feature of existing Wallet-as-a-Service deployments
[13, 17]: the communication network is star-shaped, centered around a machine
called the Relayer, denoted R. All end-to-end channels between parties remain
authenticated, e.g., via signatures, but go through R. Hence, when an honest
party Pi sends a message m to all parties via R, dubbed a multicast, then a
corrupt R can possibly refuse to deliver m to some or all parties, but not alter
the content of the message delivered. Note that a corrupt sender Pi could send
conflicting messages to different parties.
Note that it would be straightforward to further generalize the specifications
of ML-DSaaSr into an upgrade, TSaaSr, of the model TSaaSsh (essentially by
abstracting-out the commitment and salt of the Relayer). We refrained to, for
conciseness and clarity.
4.1
Protocol ML-DSaaSr
The protocol has an offline phase called ΠPreSign, and an online phase called
ΠSign, both described in Figure 4. They are bound by a session identifier, sid,
chosen by the Relayer R. We first give a high-level description.
1. Pre-signatures generation (ΠPreSign). R samples a salt saltR, stores (sid, saltR)
in its table of pending salts, SaltsR, generates the commitment comR =
HR(saltR) via a random oracle HR, and then multicasts it. Upon receiv-
ing the commitment, each party Pi runs the pre-processing algorithm PP
to generate its nonce wi and multicasts it. Parties then run the Unanimous-
or-Abort sub-protocol (UoA, Figure 5) to check unanimity of the transcript
(sid, act, comR, (wj)j). On acceptance, each party binds the transcript to its
local state; otherwise it aborts.
2. Signing (ΠSign). The Client C samples saltC, signs σC ←SignC(sid∥saltC∥H(msg)),
and sends cr = (sid, msg, saltC, σC) to the Relayer R. The Relayer checks that
no prior request was done for this sid, then multicasts (cr, saltR), opening its
commitment. Each party checks the opening, i.e., that HR(saltR) = comR,
and checks the signature of C on cr. Then it re-randomizes the salt provided
by C by XORing it with saltR, i.e., salt ←cr.saltC ⊕saltR, and produces its
partial signature using salt with the same PSign as before.
The check by R, of freshness of the sid, is formalized by AcceptClientRequest
below. It is the rampart against the adversary which would observe R releasing
its saltR, then would make the corrupt C send many other signing requests to R
for the same sid. Indeed, since the adversary would then know the corresponding
saltR, it could potentially mount a ROS [3]-like attack –at least our unforgeability
proof would not go through. The detailed description of ML-DSaaSr makes use
of helper algorithms, of which Combine and Verify which remain unchanged. We
now describe the new or modified helper algorithms:
• Keygen(κ, N, T) →(vk, (ski)i∈[N]). Identical to the simplified model, with the
addition that the Client generates an authentication key pair (pkC, skC) ←
SigGen(1κ) and registers pkC with all parties before the first session.
13

• Client(msg, sid) →cr. The Client samples saltC ←{0, 1}256, computes σC ←
SignC(sid∥saltC∥H(msg)), and returns cr := (sid, msg, saltC, σC).
• VerifyClientSignature(cr) →1(accept)/0(reject). Verifies the Client’s authenti-
cation signature on cr, i.e., outputs Verify(pkC, (cr.sid∥cr.saltC∥H(cr.msg)), cr.σC).
• AcceptClientRequest(cr, SaltsR) →1(accept)/0(reject). Run by the Relayer R,
it asserts that there exists an entry of the form (cr.sid, act, saltR) ∈SaltsR, i.e.,
that the session exists and has not been consumed. On acceptance, removes
the entry (cr.sid, act, saltR) from SaltsR.
• UoA(act) (Unanimous-or-Abort). It is the only interactive sub-protocol of this
list, and is analogous to the ”weak broadcast” of [9, §3.5.1]. Each party com-
putes a digest of the full session transcript which it observed and multicasts
it (through the authenticated channels via R). A party accepts a transcript
only if it received it (its digest) from all parties, else, it aborts. Hence a cor-
rupt R can cause aborts but not acceptance of conflicting transcripts. UoA
is further formalized in Appendix A.
ΠPreSign
Relayer R:
1: Choose a 256-bit sid not used before and a T-sized
subset act ⊂[n]
2: sample saltR ←{0, 1}256 ▷future salt randomizer
3: set comR := HR(saltR) ▷commit to randomizer
4: store (sid, act, saltR) in SaltsR
5: Multicast (sid, act, comR) to parties in act and to C
Each Party Pi:
6: upon receiving (sid, act, comR) from R:
7:
assert: i ∈act.
8:
assert: (sid, , , , ) /∈sti.
9:
Run (wi, ri) ←PP(†)(i, sti)
10:
Multicast (sid, wi) to parties in act
11: upon receiving (sid, (wj)j∈act\{i}):
12:
Run UoA(act) on  sid, act, comR, (wj)j∈act

13:
if UoA returns accept:
14:
sti ←sti ∪{(sid, act, (wj)j∈act, ri, comR)}
15:
else discard session sid and abort
(†) obvious adaptation of Figure 3 where sti is not up-
dated and ri is explicitly returned
ΠSign(sid, msg)
Client C:
1: cr = (sid, saltC, msg, σC) ←Client(msg, sid)
2: Send cr to the Relayer R.
Relayer R:
3: assert AcceptClientRequest(cr, SaltsR) = 1
4: Retrieve and remove (sid, saltR) from SaltsR
5: Multicast (cr, saltR) to the parties in act
Each Party Pi:
6: upon receiving (cr, saltR) from R:
7:
assert ∃(cr.sid, act, (wj)j∈act, ri, comR) ∈sti
then remove it from sti
8:
assert i ∈act
9:
assert VerifyClientSignature(cr) = 1
10:
assert HR(saltR) = comR
11:
Computes salt ←cr.saltC ⊕saltR
12:
ecr (‡) ←(msg, act, (wj)j∈act, salt)
13:
Run (sigi, sti) ←PSign(†)(vk, ecr, i, ski, ri)
14:
return sigi to R
(‡) recomputes to itself a client request in the
ML-DSaaSsh format
(†) obvious adaptation of Figure 3 where ri is an
explicit input instead of being in the state
Fig. 4: The ML-DSaaSr protocol with a Relayer R.
4.2
Analysis
Remark 6 (Liveness). A corrupt Relayer can block messages, causing the pro-
tocol to abort. Liveness therefore requires an honest Relayer, but this is the case
in all existing deployments using a Relayer.
14

We now show that ML-DSaaSr is unforgeable if either the Client or the
Relayer is honest (see Table 2 for a comparison of this guarantee with existing
constructions). To avoid formally redefining the security definition, we choose to
keep this section slightly informal. We define unforgeability of ML-DSaaSr
as follows. At the start of the game, the adversary A additionally chooses to
corrupt either the Client, C, or the Relayer, R. Throughout the game, A can
make corrupt parties act arbitrarily, while the game simulates the remaining
honest machines (including C and/or R) acting honestly.
• If R is honest, A has oracle access to R initiating pre-processings via ΠPreSign(act).
• If C is honest, A has oracle access to C initiating signing queries via ΠSign(sid, msg).
Definition of a valid forgery: The adversary wins the unforgeability game if
it outputs a valid signature σ over a message msg such that no honest party
ever issued a partial signature on msg for any salt. Namely, no honest party
ever does the action of running line 13 of Figure 4 (ΠSign), i.e., of running
PSign(vk, ecr, i, ski, ri) with ecr.msg = msg. Note that protocol ΠSign could be
straightforwardly enriched with parties further asserting possible external poli-
cies, before accepting to issue a partial signature on a cr.msg. Hence, our defi-
nition of unforgeability would capture such policies. Defining them is left out of
the scope of this paper.
Theorem 2. Let A be an adversary against the unforgeability of ML-DSaaSr,
making at most Qs calls to honest parties and QH calls to the random ora-
cles (including HR). There exists an adversary B against the unforgeability of
ML-DSaaSsh (thus AdvML-DSaaSsh
B
is bounded in Theorem 1), which runs in ap-
proximately the same time as A (TB ≈TA), such that
AdvML-DSaaSr
A
≤AdvML-DSaaSsh
B
+ Qs · QH/2256
Proof. We start by analyzing the unforgeability game of ML-DSaaSr, denoted
Game 1. Then we modify it into Game 1′ in a way that the view of A, hence its
advantage, is (almost) preserved. Then we conclude by building a reduction B,
i.e., an attacker of the unforgeability of ML-DSaaSsh, which uses an adversary
A of Game 1′ as a sub-routine.
Claim (Consistency).
By construction of UoA, any two honest parties that
accept a session hold the same transcript (sid, act, comR, (wj)j∈act). A corrupt R
can prevent some parties from accepting, but cannot break consistency among
those that do. In particular, this lets us refer unambiguously to the aggregated
nonce w = P
j∈act wj and the commitment comR per session.
Game 1′ (Deferred saltR).
If R is corrupt, then this game is identical to
Game 1. Else, if R is honest, we replace comR = HR(saltR) with a uniform value
and defer the sampling of saltR until R reveals it, at which point we program
HR(saltR) on comR (unless saltR was queried before, in which case it crashes).
Indistinguishability from Game 1 follows from the fact that HR is a random
oracle, so comR is independent of saltR; the adversary hits the given saltR with
probability at most QH/2256, hence it hits one of the saltR’s with probability at
most Qs · QH/2256.
15

Constructing the adversary B. We describe an adversary B against the
ML-DSaaSsh unforgeability game, in particular having access to OPP and OClient,
and using as a subroutine an adversary against Game 1′, denoted A.
• During ΠPreSign. B calls OPP to obtain (wi)i∈act∩honest. If R is corrupt, the ad-
versary provides comR directly. If R is honest, then B samples comR uniformly
at random. Once B obtains the nonces (wi)i∈act∩corrupt from A, it simulates
the UoA sub-protocol from the transcript (sid, act, comR, (wj)j∈act).
• During ΠSign. Upon R (corrupt or honest simulated) relaying a valid request
from the Client C, cr = (sid, saltC, msg, σC) 3 along with a saltR which opens
its commitment, then B calls OClient(msg, (wj)j∈act), where the (wj)j∈act are
the common output of the preprocessing of sid. OClient internally generates
a client request ecr, which contains a salt sampled uniformly at random. Then
it runs PSign for each honest party and returns to B the partial signatures
of the parties i ∈act ∩honest generated as (sigi, ) ←PSign(vk, ecr, i, ski, sti),
together with the ecr.
– If R is honest, B sets saltR := saltC ⊕salt. It varies uniformly independently
from the view of A so far, since salt also does. Hence the saltR is consistent
with Game 1′.
– Else if C is honest, upon obtaining saltR from R, then B sets saltC :=
saltR ⊕salt. It varies uniformly independently from the view of A so far, as
in Game 1′, since salt also does.
Finally, B simulates the honest parties returning their partial signatures
(sigi)act∩honest. Since they are computed from ecr, which matches what parties
recompute in PSign(sid, msg), it follows that the (sigi)act∩honest are distributed
as in Game 1′.
• When A outputs a forgery (msg, sig, ctx), B outputs the same forgery. If A
wins, then by definition no party ever accepted to apply PSign to a signing
request for msg from the Client (corrupt or honest simulated). Hence, msg
was never queried by B to its OClient. As a result, (msg, sig, ctx) is also a
winning forgery for B.
5
Implementation and evaluation
We evaluate the semi-honest variant ML-DSaaSsh against the state-of-the-art
Threshold ML-DSA scheme from [10]; the upgrade to ML-DSaaSr adds only a
single XOR and one hash verification per party in the online phase, so its impact
on the benchmarks is negligible. Both schemes use the same parameters, corre-
sponding to ML-DSA-44 (NIST category 2). We focus on the online phase, since
it is the critical path latency experienced by a client. Our Golang prototype4
extends the reference implementation of [10] with a libp2p-pubsub (GossipSub)
3 “Valid” means which passes AcceptClientRequest, i.e., with a sid not consumed yet,
and which passes VerifyClientSignature.
4 Our implementation is available at https://github.com/Antoineurban/threshol
d-ml-dsa
16

networking stack in place of direct TCP streams (since it requires each party to
maintain a dedicated connection to every other party). This introduces serializa-
tion overhead compared to direct TCP channels; consequently, our bandwidth
figures are a conservative upper bound on communication costs.
Experimental Setup. We deployed the protocol on Amazon AWS using t3.small
instances (2 vCPUs, 2 GiB RAM). To rigorously test the protocol under realistic
wide-area network (WAN) conditions, we distributed T active instances across
three geographically distant regions: ap-southeast-2 (Sydney), eu-central-1
(Frankfurt), and eu-west-3 (Paris), enforcing a ≥290 ms RTT floor by requiring
at least one active party in Sydney and one in Europe.
(T, N)
Online
running time
[10]
Online
running time
(our work)
Online
bandwidth
[10]
Online
bandwidth
(our work)
(2, 3)
771.48
315.38
33.114
12.989
(2, 4)
818.09
362.41
38.138
16.237
(3, 4)
1298.00
534.11
90.852
39.898
(3, 5)
1584.37
548.52
195.101
85.064
(4, 5)
2293.14
936.85
448.522
195.204
(3, 6)
1829.88
801.26
266.154
116.861
(4, 6)
2365.03
796.96
673.306
295.607
(5, 6)
3014.45
1080.00
1189.762
522.345
Table 3: Average running times (in ms) and bandwidths (in kilobytes) of the
online parts of the Threshold ML-DSA scheme from [10] and our ML-DSaaSsh
version, for different values of N and T.
Methodology and Metrics. We measure the latency and bandwidth of the Online
Phase, defined as the operations that must block until the message is available:
the two last signing rounds and the combining round for [10], versus the sin-
gle signing round and the combining round for our scheme. Running times of
key generation, preprocessing, and verification are essentially the same in both
schemes and are omitted. Our metrics are averages that include potential aborts
from rejection sampling, unlike [10] which reports averages over successful runs
only. This captures the true amortized cost of generating a valid signature.
Results. Table 3 compares the online performance. Our scheme completes in
300–1100 ms, achieving a 2–3× speedup and a comparable reduction in band-
width over [10]. For the common (N = 3, T = 2) configuration, we achieve an
online latency of 315 ms against a 290 ms RTT floor, implying a minimal soft-
ware overhead. The sharp increase for higher thresholds is driven by the parallel
repetition parameter K, which scales superlinearly.