Secret-Carrying Puzzles and Garbled Circuits Optimized for
Zero-knowledge Proofs
Debasish Ray Chawdhuri
Manoj PrabhakaranвҲ—
draychawdhuri@cse.iitb.ac.in
manojmp@iitb.ac.in
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India
Abstract
In this work, we introduce the concept of Obliviously Checkable
Secret-Carrying Puzzles (OxSP) and build proof-friendly Garbled
Circuits (GCs) to enable their practical implementation. OxSPs
allow one to publicly pose puzzles and verify purported solutions
received in response, keeping the desired parts of the puzzles and
the responses hidden.
We show how OxSPs can be based on Garbled Circuits (GCs).
However, this requires ZK-SNARK proofs of correctness of garbling.
We note that combining existing GC and ZK-SNARK constructions
results in very large computational costs for the OxSP solvers. Our
main technical contribution is to design a new proof-friendly GC
construction which cuts down the cost of generating a proof of
correct garbling to almost a third, without resorting to non-standard
cryptographic assumptions.
Beyond its use in OxSP, we expect our proof-friendly GCs to be
of significant independent interest, as a tool for auditable secure
2-party computation.
1
Introduction
Many transactions carried out over a blockchain, possibly using
smart contracts, are between two parties. We introduce a general
purpose tool, called Obliviously Checkable Secret-carrying Puzzles
(OxSP), which enhances the versatility of such transactions, by
leveraging the power of secure 2-party computation (2PC).
Consider a smart-contract based transaction of the following
general form: Alice offers to transfer a certain amount of crypto-
currency to anyone who can post a message that satisfies certain
conditions she has specified. (We shall refer to this as a puzzle). If
later on, Bob posts such a message (which we shall refer to as a
solution), the block-chain (implemented by a crowd with a large
enough fraction of honest/rational players) automatically trans-
fers the promised amount from AliceвҖҷs account to BobвҖҷs account,
without any intervention from Alice. Compared to using smart-
contracts directly in such a situation, using an OxSP (which we
shall elaborate on shortly) offers a few advantages:
вҖў Privacy: External observers do not see the puzzleвҖҷs solution. Even
Alice does not see the solution directly, but only a desired func-
tion of the solution. Further some aspects of the puzzle itself
could be kept hidden from the observers and Bob, if desired.
вҖў Efficiency: Without using any off-chain mechanisms, the ob-
serversвҖҷ effort can be small and independent of the size of the
challenge or the solution, unless a dispute arises between the
two transacting parties. Such disputes are irrational as they can
be publicly resolved (with a bit of effort from the observers) and
penalties can be attached to false claims.
We describe a few example use cases to demonstrate our moti-
vation. Consider Alice looking to buy a solution for a hard opti-
mization problem (e.g., an instance of the Traveling Salesperson
Problem, Integer Linear Programming, or Max-SAT, or a crypto-
graphic problem like finding a small pre-image for a hash function).
Suppose she already has one candidate solution, and she is inter-
ested in purchasing a better solution. If she were to directly use
a smart-contract for soliciting such a solution, she will need to
post her solution (or at least its value) to ensure that only better
solutions will get paid; further, someone wishing to transact with
Alice will have to reveal their solution publicly rather than just to
her.
With an OxSP, Alice can post a challenge which hides her so-
lution; then anyone can attempt to sell her a solution without
revealing it to anyone else, and further it is not revealed to Alice
either, unless it meets the criterion she has set. In all of this, the
observers need not take any action till a time-limit, when the pur-
chase will be finalized (seller getting the promised amount) or Alice
declares, after obliviously checking the submitted solution, that it
is not a better solution than her own. In the latter case, she will
be able to prove this to the seller and the public, while keeping
both solutions secret; furthermore, verifying this proof will be very
efficient (involving only one hash evaluation).
As one may expect, Zero-Knowledge (ZK) proofs will play a role
in implementing OxSP. However, ZK proofs are not enough for
OxSP. Indeed, for Alice and Bob to check if the submitted solution
is better than hers when neither party knows both of the solutions,
what is required is an instance of 2PC. As we shall see, ZK proofs
combined with a classical tool for 2PC, namely Garbled Circuits
(GCs), will yield a viable implementation of OxSP. Apart from
conceptualizing OxSP, the key technical challenge we attack is of
reducing the cost of constructing ZK proofs about Garbled Circuits.
OxSP is powerful enough to support more sophisticated applica-
tions. Below, we illustrate a few such applications:
вҖў Smart Contracts with Secret-Handshakes: OxSP can be used
to create smart contracts between a pair of parties such that the
contract is engaged only when secret parameters supplied by
the two parties вҖңagreeвҖқ with each other (e.g., the asking-price
by a seller is no more than the price that a potential buyer is
willing to pay; parameters of a product from a potential supplier
meet the buyerвҖҷs requirements; credentials supplied match cre-
dentials sought; etc.). More generally, the terms of the contract

Debasish Ray Chawdhuri and Manoj Prabhakaran
can be determined by the secret parameters (e.g., if a buyer pro-
vides a valid discount coupon, a pseudonymous identifier for
the coupon is revealed to prevent double-spending of coupons,
while transferring only the discounted price to the seller).
вҖў Private Auditing of Smart Contracts: In a scenario as above
where smart contracts carry secrets, they may need to be audited
for compliance with laws and/or for fairness. By encoding a
smart contract as an OxSP, statistical tests (with secret test-cases,
encoded as OxSP solutions) can be performed on it, with publicly
verifiable outcomes.
вҖў Private Benchmarks for (Small) ML Models: Many widely
used traditional ML models (like Random Decision Forests used
in banking and financial industrial sectors, or decision logic for
fraud detection or spam filters) can often be implemented as
circuits with fewer than a million gates. By encoding test data as
secrets in an OxSP, and model parameters as secrets in a solution,
a public leader-board can be maintained without revealing these
secrets.
вҖў In the above applications, one can add an element of trustworthy
randomization (e.g., for lotteries when choosing one of many
qualifying bids, or for randomizing statistical tests or test-cases)
without resorting to an external source of randomness. For this,
the puzzleвҖҷs secret can incorporate a key for a pseudorandom
function.
Related Work
Our work lies at the intersection of two slightly different lines
of work: bringing blockchains to secure multi-party computation
(MPC) and bringing MPC to blockchains. In the former case, the
focus is on leveraging the features of blockchains, like smart con-
tracts, digital assets, and a bulletin-board to enhance the efficiency
or fairness of MPC. The latter line of work, which we mainly fall
into, focuses on using MPC techniques to enhance the efficiency
and features of blockchains.
Blockchains for MPC. While OxSP is best viewed as a tool for
blockchains, it does retain the functionality of general-purpose 2PC
(when вҖңprivate feedbackвҖқ is also incorporated, as discussed later).
Hence, one may view our work as also continuing the thread of
leveraging blockchain features to enhance 2PC. In this perspective,
the main features that OxSP brings to 2PC are public auditability
and fairness, in a minimally interactive setting.
Blockchain has been used for public auditability of MPC proto-
cols [11, 24, 28, 31, 32]. In particular, [11] describes a protocol called
GABLE that uses garbled circuits to hide the details of computation
and enable MPC over Ethereum blockchain, assuming a trusted
garbler. [32] uses garbled circuits over blockchain to achieve the
same, settling for a covert security model, which allows them to
use a relatively light-weight cut-and-choose protocol. [28] focuses
on cheater detection to ensure fairness. [24] also uses a blockchain
to enable public auditability to an MPC protocol.
Fairness is a related MPC feature enabled by blockchains. In the
context of MPC, fairness refers to the requirement that if any party
receieves an output from a protocol, all honest parties must too.
Motivated by the fact that without honest majority, fairness is im-
possible to achieve in general purpose MPC, the possibility of using
external setups has been studied. In recent years, blockchain mod-
els, with their smart-contract features, have emerged as a popular
framework for enabling fairness in 2PC and MPC [6, 15]. The gen-
eral idea in these constructions is to detect and penalize a party in
an MPC protocol if they do not cooperate in allowing all players to
obtain outputs. For this the parties would deposit cryptocurrencies
before starting an MPC protocol (with public auditability/cheater
detection features) that is carried out over a blockchain.
MPC for Blockchains. Much of the work in this line has focused
on a very special case of 2PC, namely Zero-Knowledge (ZK) proofs
(see e.g., [29]). This is primarily due to the remarkable improvement
of efficiency of ZK proofs, in the form of Succinct Non-Interactive
Arguments of Knowledge (SNARKs) and related technologies. In
the current work, we leverage these tools, but go beyond the func-
tionality of ZK. As discussed earlier, OxSP enables several new
blockchain applications.
Non-Interactive Secure Computation and Relatives. Another theme
of this work is to enable 2PC with security against active corruption
in a non-interactive manner. This problem and its variants have
been extensively studied, particularly in the form of Non-Interactive
Secure Computation (NISC) [1, 10, 20, 22, 23].
GCs form a natural tool for NISC. However, traditionally, using
a ZK proof for proving the correctness of a GC has been considered
unrealistically inefficient, and much work has focused on alternate
techniques like cut-and-choose, MPC-in-the-head, and customized
ZK protocols exploiting features of specially constructed GCs [3, 4,
21, 25, 26]. Much of this work has focused on asymptotic efficiency,
and are still not practical.
However, with the advent of efficient ZK-SNARKs, using them
for NISC has been explored. In particular, [1] shows that using the
hash-based Ligero proof system [5] to prove the correctness of GCs
can lead to a reasonably practical NISC protocol. Our construction
could be viewed as an alternative that uses the more widely adopted
proof systems based on elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC), thereby
making it easier to integrate into existing blockchain eco-system.
Further, any concrete efficiency improvements in the ECC-based
SNARK systems will be directly exploitable in our construction.
However, we remark that for large puzzles, using a hash-based
proof system to instantiate OxSP could be advantageous. An exact
comparison between the costs in our construction and one using the
approach of [1] is difficult, due to the very different proof systems
employed. Nevertheless, just as in the case of different proof systems
having their own merits, we believe that the different trade-offs
offered by these two approaches will be of interest to different
applications of OxSP.
1.1
Our Results
Our contributions are two-fold:
вҖў We put forward OxSP as a versatile primitive for use in blockchains,
and show that it can be efficiently instantiated using a Garbled
Circuit (GC) construction that supports efficient proof of correct-
ness, and an appropriate Oblivious Transfer protocol.
вҖў We then present a novel GC construction using elliptic-curve
cryptography that turns out to be significantly more efficient to

Secret-Carrying Puzzles and Garbled Circuits Optimized for Zero-knowledge Proofs
generate succinct correctness proofs for, compared to the (other-
wise more efficient) GC constructions based on symmetric-key
cryptographic primitives.
While GC constructions have traditionally exploited fast symmetric-
key primitives and have achieved remarkable efficiency levels (see
e.g., [19]), their use in many situations is hampered by their restric-
tion to a semi-honest adversary model. Our approach to addressing
this is to allow basing GC on elliptic-curve primitives (we rely on the
DDH assumption). Using elliptic-curve primitives is more expen-
sive in terms of constructing the GC itself, but leads to much better
efficiency in the more expensive step of proving the correctness of
the GC.
Alternatives. We also explore alternatives for proof-friendly GC
constructions using proof-friendly symmetric-key primitives. One
possibility (though not readily available in the literature) is to use
lookups for proving the correctness of a standard AES-based GC;
we find that this remains quite expensive. Another possibility is
to use the Poseidon 2 hash function [17] as a random oracle in a
traditional GC construction. We study this alternative and propose
a new GC construction relying on a proof-friendly instantiation of
a random oracle; as opposed to the baseline (using Poseidon 2 as
random oracle in a conventional GC construction), this achieves
efficiency comparable to our main construction. However, relying
on a relatively untested and highly structured hash function as a
random oracle for the privacy of the GC itself (rather than just
the soundness of ZK proofs) is arguably undesirable, and hence
we consider our main construction as dominating this alternative.
Nevertheless, this construction maybe of interest and is described
in Appendix B.
Evaluation. The main cost in the system is the computational
effort of the Solver in generating proofs of correctness of garbling.
In ECC-based ZK-SNARKs, this cost is directly accounted for by
the number of gates in the circuit for the statement that is proven.
Hence, for a fairly accurate comparison of our construction with al-
ternative approaches using ECC-based ZK-SNARKs, we can simply
count the number of these gates. Table 1 shows this comparison. We
estimate that in a well-provisioned system (e.g., with a gaming GPU
and 64 GB RAM), using currently available GPU implementations
of compatible ZK-SNARK systems (specifically, UltraPlonk based
on [13, 14]), this translates to a few seconds of Solver computation
time for every few thousand gates in the puzzle circuit.
1.2
Technical Overview
OxSP from Garbled Circuits and ZK-SNARKs. An OxSP chal-
lenge is specified by a function рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Ҙ, В·), where рқ‘ғis a public function
and рқ‘Ҙis a secret component of the puzzle. A solution рқ‘Ұcan be
evaluated using this function to obtain a вҖңgradeвҖқ for the solution,
as well as additional optional information about the solution that
is revealed to the challenger.
Since OxSP involves an arbitrary computation (namely, the eval-
uation of a puzzle) with secret inputs, it is natural that tools from
secure 2PC can be leveraged to implement them. As mentioned
earlier, the tool of choice for us is Garbled Circuits (GCs).
First, we note that a GC is a вҖңone-timeвҖқ object: it can be securely
evaluated on only one input. On the other hand, a single puzzle
posted by a challenger must be available to all the solvers. Hence,
the puzzle itself cannot be implemented using GCs. Instead, we shall
use GCs to encode the solutions to a puzzle: each solver will post a
GC implementation of the puzzle circuit, with its solution included
as input, and this solution will be evaluated by the challenger. The
grades, as well as any information about the solution that must
be revealed to the challenger, will be produced by this evaluation
process; as explained later, the grades will be encoded in a manner
that is easy to publicly authenticate.
To prevent the solver from cheating by altering the puzzle, it is
important that the solution includes a proof of correctness of the
GC. This leads us to our key technical challenge, which we shall
shortly address.
There is one more aspect of our OxSP construction that needs
explanation, namely how the secret рқ‘Ҙis encoded in the puzzle.
Following how a GC is used in 2PC, we employ an Oblivious Trans-
fer (OT) protocol to enable the challenger to get its secret input
рқ‘Ҙencoded using the labels of the GC for each solution. We rely
on a UC-secure 2-round OT protocol, using a CRS as a setup [27].
In such a protocol, the first message is generated by the receiver
whose input is a вҖңchoice bitвҖқ рқ‘Ҹ, and the sender whose input is a
pair of strings (рқ‘ 0,рқ‘ 1), generates the second message; the receiver
can then recover рқ‘ рқ‘Ҹfrom the second message, with help of the
state information it has retained from the computation of the first
message. In our OxSP construction, to encode each bit of рқ‘Ҙ, the
challenger generates the receiverвҖҷs message using that bit as the
choice-bit. These first OT messages which encode рқ‘Ҙ, combined with
a puzzle circuit (in the clear) forms the full challenge. The puzzle
solution will include a garbled circuit encoding the puzzle circuit,
OT second messages that allow the challenger to recover the labels
for the wires corresponding to рқ‘Ҙ, and also the labels that encode
the actual solution рқ‘Ұ.
ZK-Friendly Garbled Circuits. A standard вҖңgate-by-gateвҖқ gar-
bled circuit construction involves picking a вҖңlabelвҖқ for each wire of
the circuit, and designing вҖңgarbled gates.вҖқ Given one label each for
the two input wires of a gate (say Kрқ‘Һ
рқ‘ўand Kрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘Ј, where рқ‘ў, рқ‘Јare the
indices of the wires and рқ‘Һ,рқ‘ҸвҲҲ{0, 1}), the garbled gate allows the
evaluator to recover the correct label for the output wire of that
gate (i.e., Kрқ‘”(рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ)
рқ‘Ө
, where рқ‘Өis the output wire index and рқ‘”is the
gateвҖҷs function).
As such, a garbled gate implements a function рқҡҝthat maps two
labels to another label. We shall refer to the garbled gate by this
function рқҡҝthrough out the sequel.
Our approach to implementing a garbled gate is to rely on elliptic-
curve cryptography, as popular SNARK systems can natively sup-
port computations over many elliptic curves.
Given an elliptic-curve group G over a field Fрқ‘һwith prime-order
рқ‘қ, where DDH is hard, and two random non-identity elements g, h вҲҲ
G, the map K вҶҰвҶ’(gK, hK) serves as a pseudorandom generator that
yields two group elements from a single label (in Fрқ‘һ, but effectively
in Fрқ‘қ).1 We shall rely on a simple function x : G вҶ’Fрқ‘һto map a
group element back to an element in Fрқ‘һ. The garbled gate function
рқҡҝ(which maps input labels to an output label, as mentioned above)
1To allow fan-out, multiple such (g, h) pairs will be used.

Debasish Ray Chawdhuri and Manoj Prabhakaran
Scheme
No. of gates involved in the proof per garbled gate (approx.)
Addition
Multiplication
Lookup
SHA-256 based [16]
88,000
368,000
0
AES-based (using [2])
360,000
40,000
0
AES-based with lookups (new)
0
0
4,848 (7 lookup wires)
Our main scheme with lookups
332
896
128 (4 lookup wires)
Alternative scheme using Poseidon-2 (Appendix B)
1,280
1,024
0
Table 1: Cost of generating proof of correctness per garbled gate, in terms of the number of arithmetic gates in the relation
being proven.
is implemented using a polynomial рқ‘ғof four variables over the field
Fрқ‘һ:
рқҡҝ(Kрқ‘ў, Kрқ‘Ј) = рқ‘ғ

x(gKрқ‘ў), x(hKрқ‘ў), x(gKрқ‘Ј), x(hKрқ‘Ј)

.
The monomials in рқ‘ғ(there are 12 of them in our construction)
are chosen such that, given input and output labels for рқҡҝalong
with the constraints of a binary gate, the coefficients of рқ‘ғcan be
sampled so as to let рқҡҝsatisfy the constraints, and so that, under
the DDH assumption, this yields a secure garbled circuit.
A SNARK to prove the correctness of garbling may use вҖңlookup
gatesвҖқ to represent the computation of elliptic curve exponentiation
using a relatively small number of gates. This uses precomputed
certain exponents of the group elements g and h. As we shall see, it is
also required that the pair (g, h) needs to vary across вҖңneighboring
gatesвҖқ (i.e. gates that share at least one of the inputs). Combined,
these two requirements impose an a priori limit on the fan-out,
chosen at the setup (though fan-outs larger than this limit can be
supported by pre-compiling the circuit to use additional gates to
reduce the fan-out per gate).
Proving Security of Garbling Schemes. Our garbling scheme, as
well as the classical ones, derive their security from the construction
of each gate. A contribution of this work is to formalize this intuition
by giving a security definition for garbling a single gate, so that
when this construction is used in a specified manner for garbling
an entire circuit, the resulting construction is a secure garbling
scheme. We believe this could be of independent interest in the
future, as it allows one to prove the security of a gate-by-gate GC
construction without repeating the gate-by-gate hybrid argument.
Proving Correctness of OT. Our construction also requires that
the garbler proves the correctness of the OT messages it sends.
It turns out to be cheaper to disassociate this proof from the ZK-
SNARK for the correctness of garbling. For this, the garbler will
commit to the strings to be transferred under OT, and prove (as
part of the GC correctness proof) that those strings are indeed the
correct labels, and separately prove that the message sent in the
OT protocol corresponds to the committed strings. For the latter,
we use Bulletproof [9].
2
OxSP: Syntax and Security
An OxSP scheme allows a challenger to publicly post a puzzle,
some parts of which can be kept hidden. Then puzzle solvers can
post encoded versions of their solutions so that the challenger can
obliviously check if the puzzle was solved (without necessarily
learning the entire solution). Further, the challenger can assign
a вҖңgradeвҖқ for the solution, and prove the correctness of the grade
without revealing anything else about the secrets in the puzzle or
the solution.
Graded Secret-Carrying Puzzle. Technically, a program рқ‘ғis a
graded secret-carrying puzzle (GSP) if it has a simple structural
property: its input has two parts and the output also has two parts.
When defining an OxSP scheme for a GSP, these parts of the input
and output are treated differently, according to the following inter-
pretation. The input is of the form (рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘Ұ), where рқ‘Ҙis a вҖңsecretвҖқ that
will be included in the puzzle, and рқ‘Ұis a вҖңsolutionвҖқ for the puzzle.
(The secret is optional, and there are meaningful GSPs which do
not have any secret components.) The output is of the form (рқ‘”, рқ‘Ј)
where рқ‘”is a grade for the solution and рқ‘Јis a вҖңviewвҖқ of the solution
that is revealed to the challenger.
Definition 2.1 (OxSP: Syntax). An OxSP scheme for a family of
graded secret-carrying puzzles P consists of five algorithms: setup,
mkPzl, mkSol, evSol, chkGrd, with the following syntax.
(1) setup publishes a common reference string that is given as an
implicit input to all the other algorithms.
(2) mkPzl takes as input a pair (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ), where рқ‘ғis a graded secret-
carrying puzzle program and рқ‘Ҙis the secret input to the puzzle.
The algorithm outputs (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ) as the puzzle, and a private state
рқңҺ.
(3) mkSol takes as input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ,рқ‘Ұ), where рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қare as above and рқ‘Ұis
an attempted solution, and outputs an encoded solution рқҗҝ.
(4) evSol takes as input (рқңҺ, рқҗҝ) (computed as above) and outputs
a вҖңgrade certificateвҖқ рқҗәand an output рқ‘Ј. If the certificate is a
special value вҠҘ, then рқ‘Јis empty; otherwise the grade certificate
рқҗә= (рқ‘”, рқңӢ) where рқ‘”is a grade.
(5) chkGrd takes as input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқҗҝ,рқҗә) as above, and accepts or re-
jects the grade certificate рқҗә. If accepting, it also outputs a grade
рқ‘”(possibly вҠҘ, if рқҗәitself is вҠҘ).
The algorithms in an OxSP scheme are illustrated in Figure 1.
To describe the security of an OxSP scheme, we present an ideal
functionality involving 3 parties: Challenger, Solver and Observer.
As is conventional, we allow the ideal functionality to behave dif-
ferently based on which parties are corrupt.
Ideal Functionality:

Secret-Carrying Puzzles and Garbled Circuits Optimized for Zero-knowledge Proofs
mkPzl
mkSol
evSol
P, Z
P, x
y
L
(published, g) or 
withheld
G
chkGrd
Пғ
v
Figure 1: Components of an OxSP scheme (other than setup)
described in Definition 2.1.
вҖў Receive (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ) from Challenger, and send рқ‘ғto Solver and Ob-
server.
вҖў Receive either вҠҘor рқ‘Ұfrom Solver.
вҖ“ In the first case, send вҠҘto Challenger and (published, вҠҘ) to
Observer and terminate.
вҖ“ In the second case, proceed as follows.
вҖў Let (рқ‘”, рқ‘Ј) = рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘Ұ). Send (рқ‘”, рқ‘Ј) to Challenger.
вҖў If either Challenger or Solver is honest, receive publish or withhold
from Challenger. In the first case, send (published,рқ‘”) to Solver
and Observer; in the latter case send withheld to Solver and
Observer. Terminate.
вҖў If both Challenger and Solver are corrupt, receive (published,рқ‘”вҖІ)
or withheld from Challenger and send it to Observer. Terminate.
Note that if Solver is honest, Challenger cannot change the grade
рқ‘”that is published, but the challenger can withhold the grade;
however, in this case the functionality announces this to Observer
(and a penalty maybe imposed on Challenger for withholding the
grade). If Challenger and Solver collude, they are allowed to publish
an arbitrary grade to Observer; this corresponds to the idea that
the transaction should be seen as between Challenger and Solver,
and Observer cannot rely on the grades that are published.
Private Feedback. Though we have formulated only a public
grade, the OxSP functionality is flexible enough to implement pri-
vate feedback as well. This can be done using a puzzle рқ‘ғthat, as
part of the solution рқ‘Ұ, accepts a one-time pad from Solver, and uses
it to mask a part of the grade.
Definition 2.2 (OxSP: Security). An OxSP scheme (setup, mkPzl,
mkSol, evSol, chkGrd) is said to be secure if the following 3-party
protocol (with a trusted setup, and over a broadcast channel) is a se-
cure realization2 of the OxSP functionality against active corruption
of either party:
вҖў Setup: рқӣјвҶҗsetup is published as the setup.
вҖў Challenger, on input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ), computes (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқңҺ) вҶҗmkPzl(рқӣј, рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ),
and broadcasts (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ).
вҖў Solver, on input рқ‘Ұ, and on receiving (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ) from Challenger, com-
putes рқҗҝвҶҗmkSol(рқӣј, рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ,рқ‘Ұ) and broadcasts it.
2This security definition of OxSP can be instantiated for UC-security or standalone
security, by interpreting вҖңsecure realizationвҖқ accordingly. See discussion later.
вҖў Challenger, on receiving рқҗҝ, computes (рқ‘Ј,рқҗә) вҶҗevSol(рқӣј, рқңҺ, рқҗҝ),
broadcasts рқҗә, and outputs рқ‘Ј.
вҖў Observer computes chkGrd(рқӣј, рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқҗҝ,рқҗә); if it accepts she out-
puts рқ‘”where рқҗәhas the form (рқ‘”, рқңӢ); else, she outputs вҠҘ.
3
Garbled Circuit Preliminaries
A garbling scheme is defined as a tuple of algorithms G = (Gb, En,
De, Ev), the first of which is randomized. For a security parameter
рқ‘ҳand a boolean circuit C, Gb(1рқ‘ҳ, C) returns a tuple (рқҗ№,рқ‘’,рқ‘‘) or вҠҘ,
where рқҗ№is the string representing a garbled version of C, рқ‘’is an
input encoding function andрқ‘‘is an output decoding function. Given
an input x, En(рқ‘’, x) returns the encoded input X; given the encoded
input X, the algorithm Ev(рқҗ№, X) returns the encoded output Y; and,
given such an encoded output, the algorithm De(рқ‘‘, Y) returns the
raw output y.
Definition 3.1 (Correctness). A garbling scheme (Gb, En, De, Ev)
for a circuit family C is correct if for every circuit C вҲҲC and every
x вҲҲ{0, 1}|Cin|, Pr(рқҗ№,рқ‘’,рқ‘‘)вҶҗGb(1рқ‘ҳ,C) [De(рқ‘‘, Ev(рқҗ№, En(рқ‘’, x))) вү C(x)] is
negligible in рқ‘ҳ.
For the security definition, we need to introduce a leak function
рқңҷ(В·) that leaks some information about the circuit. The garbling
scheme does not hide the leaked information. Typically, this is
the topology of the circuit, i.e. the connections between the gates,
including the identity of the input and output gates. Given a leakage
function рқңҷ, we define the Sim security for a garbled circuit, which
corresponds to the equivalent notions of PrvSim and PrvInd as
defined in [7].
Definition 3.2 (Sim Security). A garbling scheme (Gb, En, De, Ev)
for a circuit family C is said to be Sim secure w.r.t. a leakage function
рқңҷ, if there exists a two-stage PPT simulator (S1, S2)3 such that, for
any two-stage PPT adversary (A1, A2),4

Pr
(рқңҺ,C,x)вҶҗA1
(рқҗ№,рқ‘’,рқ‘‘)вҶҗGb(1рқ‘ҳ,C)
XвҶҗEn(рқ‘’,x)
[A2(рқңҺ, рқҗ№, X,рқ‘‘) = 1]
вҲ’
Pr
(рқңҺ,C,x)вҶҗA1
(рқҗ№,X)вҶҗS1 (1рқ‘ҳ,рқңҷ(C))
рқ‘‘вҶҗS2 (рқҗ№,Ev(рқҗ№,X),C(x))
[A2(рқңҺ, рқҗ№, X,рқ‘‘) = 1]

is a negligible function of рқ‘ҳ.
Another useful property of a GC that we shall require is authen-
ticity [7], which makes it infeasible for an adversary given a GC for
a circuit C and input labels for one input x to produce an encoding
of an output other than that of C(x). The formal definition follows.
Definition 3.3 (Aut Security). A garbling scheme (Gb, En, De, Ev)
for a circuit family C is said to be Sim secure w.r.t. a leakage func-
tion рқңҷ, if for any two-stage PPT adversary (A1, A2), the following
3We allow S2 to receive the garbled circuit рқҗ№as input from рқ‘Ҷ1, to account for common
parameters. This could be avoided when no common parameters are involved.
4We use the convention that if a PPT adversary does not produce an output of the
required form вҖ” in this case, (рқңҺ, C, x) where C вҲҲC, x a valid input for C, and
рқңҺвҲҲ{0, 1}вҲ—вҖ” within its allotted running time, appropriate default values will be used.

Debasish Ray Chawdhuri and Manoj Prabhakaran
probability is negligible in рқ‘ҳ.
Pr
(рқңҺ,C,x)вҶҗA1
(рқҗ№,рқ‘’,рқ‘‘)вҶҗGb(1рқ‘ҳ,C)
XвҶҗEn(рқ‘’,x),YвҶҗA2 (рқңҺ,рқҗ№,X)
[De(Y) вҲү{вҠҘ, C(x)]
Circuit Notation. Recall that a boolean circuit C can be specified
by a directed acyclic graph, with nodes being gates and edges
being wires. The source nodes of the DAG (i.e., nodes without any
incoming edges) are the input gates, and the sink nodes (those
without outgoing edges) are the output gates. Every non-input
gate has exactly two input wires,5 and also has an associated вҖңgate
typeвҖқ (the binary operator implemented by the gate). The topology
of a circuit C, denoted as Topo(C) is simply the directed acyclic
graph associated with C, which does not include the gate types. For
brevity, we will use C to also denote the set of gates in the circuit
C, and write Cin вҠҶC and Cout вҠҶC to denote the set of input gates
and output gates respectively.
Given a circuit C each of its wires is identified with the gate from
which the wire is output. It will be convenient to denote the two
inputs wires feeding into a (non-input) gate рқ‘”вҲҲC as Lft(рқ‘”) and
Rgt(рқ‘”); its gate type is denoted as opрқ‘”.
4
OxSP from Garbled Circuits
First, we note that since a single puzzle must be available for all the
solvers, the puzzle itself cannot be implemented using GCs (which
can be evaluated securely only once). Instead, GCs will be used to
encode the solutions.
To check if a solution satisfies the puzzle, this GC will need to
be evaluated. While evaluating a GC keeps the inputs to the circuit
hidden, it also hides the gates of the circuit itself. So to prevent a
cheating solver from altering the puzzle, we will need a proof that
the GC faithfully implements the puzzle. This is where we rely on
our GC construction supporting efficient-to-construct ZK proofs of
correct garbling.
To enable publicly checking the grade posted by the challenger,
we use the following idea, which is a variation on a common ap-
proach used to authenticate purported garbled circuit outputs. The
idea is that if an output wireвҖҷs decoding information is not given
to the challenger, but it is able to produce the output label рқ‘ңfor a
value рқ‘Ҹfor that wire, then that will convince the garbler that the
wire indeed evaluated to рқ‘Ҹ.6 To make it convincing publicly, the
garbler publishes a pair (в„Һ0,в„Һ1) where в„Һрқ‘Ҹis the hash of the output
label for the bit рқ‘Ҹunder a one-way hash function рқҗ»; now anyone
can check that the label published by the challenger рқ‘ңis such that
рқҗ»(рқ‘ң) = в„Һрқ‘Ҹ.
In more detail, the OxSP construction is as follows:
вҖў setup: This generates the setup for a 2-round OT scheme and
the setup for a ZK-SNARK scheme that is used below.
вҖў mkPzl: Given input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ), where |рқ‘Ҙ| = в„“, mkPzl outputs (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқңҺ)
where рқ‘Қ= {рқ‘§рқ‘–}в„“
рқ‘–=1 and рқңҺ= {рқңҺрқ‘–}в„“
рқ‘–=1 are computed as follows:
For each рқ‘–= 1 to в„“, using the рқ‘–th bit of рқ‘Ҙas the choice-bit, the
receiverвҖҷs program in the OT protocol is executed (with the setup
5This is essentially w.l.o.g., as NOT gates can merged into the logic of the gates into
which they feed in, or the gate from which it emanates. NOT gates leading to output
gates can be handled by the decoding function.
6While not required of all вҖңgarbling schemes,вҖқ this property holds for a gate-by-gate
garbled circuit [7], which we formalize in the next section.
for the OT protocol obtained from the setup above), resulting in
a message in the OT protocol рқ‘§рқ‘–and a state рқңҺрқ‘–.
вҖў mkSol: Given inputs рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ,рқ‘Ұ, first, a GC for the circuit рқ‘ғis con-
structed as ( Лңрқ‘ғ,рқ‘’,рқ‘‘) вҶҗGb(рқ‘ғ). Then рқҗҝ= ( Лңрқ‘ғ, Лңрқ‘Ң,рқ‘Ҡрқ‘Қ,рқ‘‘view,в„Һgrade, рқңӢ)
is computed as follows:
вҖ“ Лңрқ‘ғis the garbled circuit produced by Gb(рқ‘ғ).
вҖ“ Лңрқ‘Ңconsists of a label for each input wire corresponding to рқ‘Ұ.
вҖ“ рқ‘Ҡрқ‘Қ= {рқ‘Өрқ‘–}в„“
рқ‘–=1 where рқ‘Өрқ‘–is computed as the response to the
messageрқ‘§рқ‘–in the OT protocol, given input string (рқ‘’0
рқ‘–,рқ‘’1
рқ‘–) which
are the two labels for the wire corresponding to рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–; these
strings are specified by рқ‘’produced by Gb(рқ‘ғ).
вҖ“ рқ‘‘view = {рқ‘‘0
рқ‘Јрқ‘–,рқ‘‘1
рқ‘Јрқ‘–}|рқ‘Ј|
рқ‘–=1, where each рқ‘Јрқ‘–is the index of an output
wire other than the grade output, and (рқ‘‘0
рқ‘Јрқ‘–,рқ‘‘1
рқ‘Јрқ‘–) are the two
labels for that wire as specified in the decoding information рқ‘‘.
вҖ“ в„Һgrade = {в„Һ0
рқ‘–,в„Һ1
рқ‘–)}|рқ‘”|
рқ‘–=1 where в„Һрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–= рқҗ»(рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҹ
рқӣҫрқ‘–), with рқҗ»being a one-
way hash function, and рқӣҫрқ‘–being the index of the рқ‘–th grade-
output bit.
вҖ“ рқңӢis a ZK-SNARK proof that all of the above items were
generated as prescribed, using the setup that is part of the
OxSP schemeвҖҷs setup described above. Note that the statement
proven is specified by (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқҗҝвҖІ) where рқҗҝвҖІ consists of all the
elements of рқҗҝexcept the proof рқңӢ.
вҖў evSol: Given (рқңҺ, рқҗҝ), first parse рқҗҝas ( Лңрқ‘ғ, Лңрқ‘Ң,рқ‘Ҡрқ‘Қ,рқ‘‘view,в„Һgrade, рқңӢ) as
mentioned above. Verify the proof рқңӢ. If the verification fails,
output (вҠҘ, вҠҘ); else, proceed as follows:
вҖ“ For рқ‘–= 1 to |рқ‘Ҙ|, extract a label for рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–using (рқ‘Өрқ‘–, рқңҺрқ‘–) in the
receiverвҖҷs program in the OT protocol.
вҖ“ Evaluate Лңрқ‘ғusing inputs labels for рқ‘Ҙ(extracted above) and
рқ‘Ұ(given as Лңрқ‘Ң); use рқ‘‘view to decode рқ‘Ј, the view part of the
output; the output labels corresponding to the grade wires
(рқ‘ң1, . . . ,рқ‘ң|рқ‘”|) are collected as part of the grade certificate рқҗә. рқҗә
also includes the grade itself, decoded by checking that, for
each рқ‘–, в„Һрқ‘”рқ‘–
рқ‘–= рқҗ»(рқ‘ңрқ‘–).
вҖ“ Output (рқҗә, рқ‘Ј).
вҖў chkGrd: On input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Қ, рқҗҝ,рқҗә) proceed as follows:
вҖ“ If рқҗәconsists of рқ‘”and a set of labels (рқ‘ңрқ‘–, . . . ,рқ‘ң|рқ‘”|, check that for
all рқ‘–, в„Һрқ‘”рқ‘–
рқ‘–= рқҗ»(рқ‘ңрқ‘–). If so accept, else reject.
вҖ“ If рқҗә= вҠҘ, verify the proof рқңӢincluded in рқҗҝ. Accept if the
verification fails; else reject.
Security Analysis. We present a simulator to prove that the OxSP
scheme above satisfies the security definition. For this we shall
assume that the ZK-SNARK employed is a UC-secure ZK-Proof of
Knowledge,7 and that the 2-round OT scheme is also UC secure. (If
these primitives are only standalone secure, the definition will be
satisfied with standalone security.) Also, we model the hash func-
tion as a Random Oracle, so that the hash reveals no information at
all about the pre-image until it is guessed correctly.8 The simulation
relies on Sim and Aut security of the GC scheme employed.
7In fact, it is enough to assume UC-security for the commitment of input рқ‘Ұ(which
can be achieved separately) and assume only soundness of the SNARK. While this can
be relevant to reducing the complexity of the SNARK proof systems, for simplicity,
the proof below uses UC-secure ZK-PoK.
8With the gate-by-gate garbling construction in the next section, it is enough to assume
that the hash function is a one-way function w.r.t. the distribution of labels generated
by the algorithm sample. But at this point, the definition of Aut by itself does not

Secret-Carrying Puzzles and Garbled Circuits Optimized for Zero-knowledge Proofs
If both Challenger and Solver are corrupt, the simulation is easy,
since the ideal functionality allows (corrupt) Challenger to specify
any output for Observer. If both are honest, then too the security
follows from the correctness of the garbled circuit. We focus on
the interesting cases where exactly one of Challenger and Solver is
corrupt.
Firstly, we note that the ZK-SNARK proof (included as part of рқҗҝ)
and its verification can be replaced by an invocation of the ideal
ZK-PoK functionality. So we will carry out our analysis in the вҖңZK-
PoK hybridвҖқ model. On the other hand, we shall use the 2-round
OT protocolвҖҷs simulator in a non-blackbox manner, since the ZK-
SNARK proof will refer to the messages sent in that protocol.
Corrupt Challenger. If Challenger is corrupt, the simulator will
use the OT protocolвҖҷs simulator to extract рқ‘Ҙfrom the рқ‘Қ(OT first
message), and combine it with рқ‘ғ(sent in the clear) to create the
input (рқ‘ғ,рқ‘Ҙ) for the OxSP functionality. To simulate the reply рқҗҝ
(except the SNARK, which is replaced by an ideal functionality
call), the simulator needs to create Лңрқ‘ғ(a GC for рқ‘ғ), Лңрқ‘Ң(labels for
Лңрқ‘ғcorrespoding to a unknown input рқ‘Ұ), OT reponses рқ‘Ҡрқ‘Қ, and de-
coding/verifying information рқ‘‘view and в„Һgrade. While it could have
faithfully generated Лңрқ‘ғ(since it knows рқ‘ғ), it will not be able to do so
for Лңрқ‘Ң. So the simulator relies on Sim security of the GC to sample a
simulated GC, the input labels for the inputs (рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘Ұ) and the decoding
information. Лңрқ‘Ңis derived from these input labels. рқ‘Ҡрқ‘Қis simulated
using the OT protocolвҖҷs simulator, corresponding to a corrupt re-
ceiver receiving the labels for рқ‘Ҙ. рқ‘‘view and в„Һgrade are derived from
the simulated decoding information. The simulator also simulates a
notification from the ZK-PoK functionality that all the items were
correctly constructed. Till this point, the simulation relies only on
Sim security, the simulation security for the OT protocol, and the
ideal nature of ZK-PoK functionality. Finally, by Aut security, any
grade certificate рқҗәoutput by Challenger cannot (except with negli-
gible probability) have a correct output label other than for the bits
in рқ‘”, where (рқ‘”, рқ‘Ј) = рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘Ұ). Conditioned on authenticity holding,
the following completes the simulation: if рқҗәhas a wrong output
label, the simulator sends withhold to the ideal functionality, and
otherwise sends (publish,рқ‘”).
Corrupt Solver. If Solver is corrupt (and Challenger is honest),
the simulator first obtains рқ‘ғfrom the functionality and sends it to
Solver along with simulated OT first messages рқ‘Қ. On receiving рқҗҝ
(except the proof component) and the witnesses for proving its cor-
rectness (sent to the simulated ZK-PoK) functionality from Solver,
the simulator first checks if the witnesses are valid; if not, it sends вҠҘ
to the functionality, and terminates. Otherwise, from the valid wit-
ness, the simulator extracts рқ‘Ұand sends it to the OxSP functionality.
This will result in the functionality sending (рқ‘Ј,рқ‘”) to Challenger. In
turn, Solver receives (published,рқ‘”) from the functionality, an

[вҖҰmiddle truncated for lengthвҖҰ]

he DDH assumption, as well
as a requirement that the cofactor of G is polynomially bounded.
As discussed below, the cofactor approximately equals the ratio
рқ‘һ/рқ‘қwhere Fрқ‘һis the base-field and Fрқ‘қis the scalar field. It is indeed
the case for all typical elliptic curves used in cryptography that the
cofactor is small.
Theorem 6.3. The algorithm EC-gateGb over a prime-order el-
liptic curve group G where the DDH assumption holds, and for which
the cofactor is polynomially bounded, satisfies GateSim security.
Before we prove Theorem 6.3, we summarize two main argu-
ments we shall employ. These two results appear in Lemma 6.5 and
Lemma 6.6 below with brief proof sketches (with the somewhat
tediously detailed full proofs in Appendix C.1).
(1) While we shall eventually rely on the DDH assumption for the
elliptic curve group G, our use of labels as exponents does not
immediately correspond to the distribution of exponents in the
DDH assumption. The essential difference is that we draw our
exponents from the base-field Fрқ‘һ, whereas the standard DDH
assumption draws them from the scalar field Fрқ‘қ(рқ‘қbeing the
order of G). To analyze this difference, we formulate a variant
of the DDH assumption, which we call altDDH, where one of
the exponents is drawn from Fрқ‘һ. We show that hardness of
altDDH follows tightly from the hardness of DDH.
In the proof of Theorem 6.3, the distributions involved are such
that the secret exponents are used to exponentiate many bases.
The requisite hardness assumption is captured in the definition
of altDDHвҲ—(see Definition 6.4). A routine reduction shows that
hardness of altDDH implies that of altDDHвҲ—as well. Lemma 6.5
presents this result.
(2) The second part of the proof is specific to the details of how
EC-gateGb samples the coefficients of the polynomial used to
define рқҡҝрқ‘”for a gate рқ‘”. Recall that рқҡҝрқ‘”is a function that maps
two input labels into an output label. While the actual garbling
picks the coefficients defining рқҡҝрқ‘”so that it works correctly for
all 4 possible combinations of the input labels, a simulation will
have to pick it given only one combination of input labels and
output label.
The polynomial underlying рқҡҝрқ‘”is chosen such that we can argue
that these two distributions are statistically indistinguishable.
The required result is captured in Lemma 6.6. (It is the invoca-
tion of this lemma in the proof that introduces the requirement
of a bounded cofactor.)
11For simplicity, we state the theorem in asymptotic terms. However, our proof presents
a concrete analysis.

Debasish Ray Chawdhuri and Manoj Prabhakaran
Definition 6.4. For an elliptic curve group G over the base-field
Fрқ‘һ, and an adversary A, its advantage in the altDDHвҲ—problem over
G, AdvaltDDHвҲ—
G,A
, is defined as its advantage in distinguishing between
the following two distributions:

{gрқ‘–, hрқ‘–}рқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣ], {gрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘–, hрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘–, gрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘–, hрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘–}рқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣ]
 
рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘ҰвҶҗFрқ‘һ,
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣ] gрқ‘–,hрқ‘–вҶҗG
and

{gрқ‘–, hрқ‘–}рқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣ], {gрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘–, hрқ‘Ҙ
рқ‘–, gрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘–, hрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘–}рқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣвҲ’1], gвҖІ, hвҖІ, gвҖІвҖІ, hвҖІвҖІ 
рқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘ҰвҶҗFрқ‘һ,
вҲҖрқ‘–вҲҲ[рқ‘ӣ] gрқ‘–,hрқ‘–вҶҗG,
gвҖІ,hвҖІ,gвҖІвҖІ,hвҖІвҖІвҶҗG
.
Lemma 6.5. For any PPT adversary A for the altDDHвҲ—prob-
lem on an elliptic curve group G over the base-field Fрқ‘һ, there is a
PPT adversary AвҖІ for the DDH problem on G such that Advрқҗ·рқҗ·рқҗ»
G,AвҖІ вүҘ
AdvaltDDHвҲ—
G,A
/4 вҲ’16/вҲҡрқ‘һ.
Proof sketch. (See Appendix C.1 for the full proof.) First, we
show that hardness of the altDDH problem over G (which is similar
to the DDH problem, but one of the exponents is drawn from Fрқ‘һ
instead of Fрқ‘қ) follows tightly from the hardness of DDH over G.
This relies on HasseвҖҷs Theorem, a classical result on elliptic curves,
which shows that the maximum cardinality of an elliptic curve
over a base-field Fрқ‘һis рқ‘Ғ= рқ‘һВұ рқ‘Ӯ(вҲҡрқ‘һ), and a prime-order subgroup
G of such a curve has order рқ‘қ= рқ‘Ғ/в„Һfor an integer в„Һ(called the
cofactor of G). This means рқ‘һ/рқ‘қ= рқ‘һв„Һ/рқ‘Ғ= в„Һ(1 Вұ 1/вҲҡрқ‘һ) and hence is
very close to an integer. Thus drawing an exponent uniformly from
Fрқ‘һhas the effect of drawing it almost uniformly from Fрқ‘қ(since
exponents work modulo рқ‘қ).
Then we show that hardness of altDDH implies the hardness of
altDDHвҲ—via a routine hybrid argument.
в–Ў
Lemma 6.6. Fix any рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ҸвҲ—вҲҲ{0, 1}, рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘Ўрқ‘ҸвҲ—,рқ‘ўрқ‘ҸвҲ—вҲҲFрқ‘һ\ {0},
and рқӣј0,0, рқӣј0,1, рқӣј1,0, рқӣј1,1 вҲҲFрқ‘һ, and any non-empty subset рқҗјвҠҶFрқ‘һ\ {0}
such that |рқҗј| вүҘрқӣҪрқ‘һ, for 0 < рқӣҪ< 1. Define a distribution over matrices
in F4Г—12
рқ‘һ
as follows:
(1) рқ‘ҹ1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ 1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘Ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—,рқ‘ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—вҶҗрқҗјuniformly.
(2) Let M = [рқҗҙрқҗөрқҗ¶] вҲҲF4Г—12
рқ‘һ
where rows of рқҗҙ, рқҗө,рқҗ¶are indexed by
(рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ) вҲҲ{0, 1}2, and are defined as:
рқҗҙрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ=

рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һ
рқ‘ҹ2
рқ‘Һ
рқ‘ рқ‘Һ
рқ‘ 2
рқ‘Һ

рқҗөрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ=
рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘Ў2
рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ў2
рқ‘Ҹ

and рқҗ¶рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ= рқҗҙрқ‘Һ,рқ‘ҸвҠҷрқҗөрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ.
(3) If M is not of rank 4, go to step (1). Else output M.
Define the following two distributions over F12
рқ‘һ:
вҖў Distribution D: Sample M as above, and output [a b c] sampled
uniformly conditioned on
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
рқӣј0,0
рқӣј0,1
рқӣј1,0
рқӣј1,1
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
= M
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
a
b
c
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
вҖў Distribution U: Sample M as above and output [a b c] sampled
uniformly conditioned on
рқӣјрқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ҸвҲ—= Mрқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ҸвҲ—
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
a
b
c
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
Then the statistical difference between D and U is at most
9
рқӣҪ2вҲҡрқ‘һ.
Proof. Sketch [see appendix C.2] for a formal proof We depend
on the well known result that if the probability of collision for a
distribution D over a set S is Cрқ‘ңрқ‘ҷ(D), i.e. Cрқ‘ңрқ‘ҷ(D) = Prрқ‘Ҙ,рқ‘ҰвҶҗD [рқ‘Ҙ=
рқ‘Ұ], then:
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘ҰвҲҲS
 Pr
рқ‘ҘвҶҗD[рқ‘Ҙ= рқ‘Ұ] вҲ’Pr
рқ‘ҘвҶҗU[рқ‘Ҙ= рқ‘Ұ]
 вүӨ
вҲҡпёҒ
|S|Cрқ‘ңрқ‘ҷ(D) вҲ’1
where U is the uniform distribution over S. In our case, we show
that Cрқ‘ңрқ‘ҷ(D) вүӨ(1/рқ‘һ11 + (58/рқӣҪ2 + 240/рқӣҪ4)/рқ‘һ12) and |S| = рқ‘һ11, thus
giving us the bound.
в–Ў
Finally, we are ready to prove Theorem 6.3.
Proof of Theorem 6.3. We start by describing the simulator
SвҲ—from the definition of GateSim. The simulated garbled gate
SвҲ—( e
KLft(рқ‘”), e
KRgt(рқ‘”), e
Kрқ‘”,рқ‘”, par) is sampled as follows:
вҖў Letрқ‘ҹ= x(g
e
KLft(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘ = x(h
e
KLft(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘Ў= x(g
e
KRgt(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘ў= x(h
e
KRgt(рқ‘”) )
вҖў Uniformly sample a, b, c вҲҲF4
рқ‘һsuch that

рқ‘ҹ
рқ‘ҹ2
рқ‘ 
рқ‘ 2
рқ‘Ў
рқ‘Ў2
рқ‘ў
рқ‘ў2
рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҹ2рқ‘Ў2
рқ‘ рқ‘ў
рқ‘ 2рқ‘ў2 пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
a
b
c
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
= e
Kрқ‘”
вҖў Return simulated рқҡҝрқ‘”described by [a b c].
Given AвҲ—= (A1, A2, A3), we need to bound
AdvgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—:=
Pr[ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(0) = 1] вҲ’Pr[ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(1) = 1]

(1)
Towards this we shall define an intermediate experiment ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—
(using an intermediate simulator SвҲ—вҲ—, defined below). This experi-
ment is identical to ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(1), except that Step (5) in Figure 2
is replaced by the following:
рқҡҝрқ‘”вҲ—вҶҗSвҲ—вҲ—(рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ҸвҲ—, opрқ‘”вҲ—, Kрқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”вҲ—), Kрқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”вҲ—), K0
рқ‘”вҲ—, K1
рқ‘”вҲ—,рқ‘”вҲ—, par)
where the process on the right hand side is defined as follows:
вҖў Let рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҺвҲ—= x(g
Kрқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘ рқ‘ҺвҲ—= x(h
Kрқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘Ўрқ‘ҸвҲ—= x(g
Kрқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”) ),рқ‘ўрқ‘ҸвҲ—=
x(h
Kрқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”) ).
вҖў Uniformly sample gвҖІ, hвҖІ, gвҖІвҖІ, hвҖІвҖІ вҶҗG \ {рқ‘Ӯ}, conditioned on
their рқ‘Ұ-coordinates not being 0,12 and let рқ‘ҹ1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—= x(gвҖІ),рқ‘ 1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—=
x(hвҖІ),рқ‘Ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—= x(gвҖІвҖІ),рқ‘ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—= x(hвҖІвҖІ).
вҖў Let M = [рқҗҙрқҗөрқҗ¶] вҲҲF4Г—12
рқ‘һ
where rows of рқҗҙ, рқҗө,рқҗ¶are indexed by
(рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ) вҲҲ{0, 1}2, and are defined as:
рқҗҙрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ=

рқ‘ҹрқ‘Һ
рқ‘ҹ2
рқ‘Һ
рқ‘ рқ‘Һ
рқ‘ 2
рқ‘Һ

рқҗөрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ=
рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘Ў2
рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ў2
рқ‘Ҹ

and рқҗ¶рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ= рқҗҙрқ‘Һ,рқ‘ҸвҠҷрқҗөрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ.
вҖў For all рқ‘Һ,рқ‘ҸвҲҲ{0, 1}, let рқӣјрқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ= K
opрқ‘”вҲ—(рқ‘Һ,рқ‘Ҹ)
рқ‘”вҲ—
.
12This conditioning is to ensure that their рқ‘Ҙ-coordinates are chosen uniformly from a
set рқҗјвҠҶFрқ‘һ, which will allow the convenience of applying Lemma 6.6. The uniformity
follows because for each such group element there is exactly one another element
with the same рқ‘Ҙ-coordinate.

Secret-Carrying Puzzles and Garbled Circuits Optimized for Zero-knowledge Proofs
вҖў Uniformly sample a, b, c вҲҲF4
рқ‘һsuch that
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
рқӣј0,0
рқӣј0,1
рқӣј1,0
рқӣј1,1
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
= M
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
a
b
c
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
вҖў Return simulated рқҡҝрқ‘”вҲ—described by [a b c].
Now,
AdvgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вүӨ
Pr[ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(1) = 1] вҲ’Pr[ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—= 1]

+
Pr[ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—= 1] вҲ’Pr[ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(0) = 1]

(2)
For the first component, the difference between the two experi-
ments вҖ“ namely simulation using SвҲ—and using SвҲ—вҲ—вҖ“ corresponds to
sampling [a b c] according to the distribution U or D in Lemma 6.6,
with the set рқҗјbeing the set of non-zero рқ‘Ҙ-coordinates of the points
in the elliptic curve group G. Hence, this component is at most
9
рқӣҪ2вҲҡрқ‘һ,
for рқӣҪвүӨ|рқҗј|/рқ‘һ. We note that by the requirement that рқ‘қ/рқ‘һвүҘрқңӮ, we can
take рқӣҪ= рқңӮ/2 вҲ’2/рқ‘һвүӨ(рқ‘қвҲ’3)/2рқ‘һвүӨ|рқҗј|/рқ‘һ; the last inequality follows
from the fact that there are at most 3 points in G that are omitted
by the conditioning used by SвҲ—вҲ—to sample each of gвҖІ, hвҖІ, gвҖІвҖІ, hвҖІвҖІ
(namely, the identity рқ‘Ӯand at most two points with рқ‘Ұ-coordinate
0), and among the other points, each point has exactly one point
with the same рқ‘Ҙ-coordinate.
Turning to the second component, if AвҲ—results in a non-negligible
distinguishing between ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—and ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(0), we shall
use it to build an adversary A for altDDHвҲ—in Lemma 6.5 with a
non-negligible advantage. For this, note that the only difference
between the two experiments is in how рқ‘ҹ1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘ 1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—,рқ‘Ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—,рқ‘ў1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—are
defined:
вҖў In one case, they are derived from the four group elements
g
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘–
, h
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘–
, g
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘–
, h
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘–
.
вҖў In the other case from the group elements (gвҖІ, hвҖІ, gвҖІвҖІ, hвҖІвҖІ).
A will be given one of these two tuples, and it will use AвҲ—to try
and tell them apart. To provide a valid input for AвҲ—, A should also
be given elements of the form g
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘—
, h
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҺвҲ—
Lft(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘—
, g
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘—
, h
K1вҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲ—
Rgt(рқ‘”вҲ—)
рқ‘—
,
for all рқ‘—which are used by EC-gateGb in gates sharing an input
withрқ‘”вҲ—. (By design, these values are all distinct from gрқ‘–, hрқ‘–.) It can be
verified that these inputs allow A to faithfully sample the inputs for
AвҲ—
3 in either of the two experiments ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—and ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(0),
depending on which of the above mentioned 4-tuples that A gets.
Hence, by Lemma 6.5
Pr[ExpвҲ—gateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вҲ—= 1] вҲ’Pr[ExpgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—(1) = 1]

вүӨ4AdvaltDDHвҲ—
G,A
+ 64/вҲҡрқ‘һ
Hence, the total advantage
AdvgateGb
C,AвҲ—,SвҲ—вүӨ64 + 9/рқӣҪ2
вҲҡрқ‘һ
+ 4Advрқҗ·рқҗ·рқҗ»
G,A
which is negligible under the DDH assumption.
в–Ў
7
Zero-knowledge Proof of Correct Garbling
We use a ZK-SNARK system that supports arithmetic circuits with
lookup gates [12, 13]. Below we explain the low-level details of this
implementation, and the costs we incur (summarized in Table 1).
Exponentiation using lookups. We require 8 elliptic curve expo-
nentiations per gate (two group generators each exponentiated to 4
labels). Elliptic curve exponentiation is very expensive in terms of
number of arithmetic gates required. But we can use lookup gates
to reduce the number of gates required substantially. Consider com-
puting gрқ‘Ҙwhere g вҲҲG and рқ‘ҘвҲҲFрқ‘һwhere рқ‘һ. fits into 256 bits. We
write рқ‘Ҙ= ГҚ15
рқ‘ҳ=0 рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳwhere each рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳhas all but one of its 16 blocks
filled with zeros. Since the value of g is pre-determined, we can
have the exponents of the form gрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳpre-computed and stored in
a table, so that gрқ‘Ҙ= ГҺ15
рқ‘ҳ=0 gрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳwhere we lookup the value of gрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳ
from the lookup table. (We do not need to check that the split is
indeed valid, since the fact that it can be looked up in the table is
good enough.) The number of entries in this table, i.e., the total
number of possible рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳvalues, is 16 Г— 216 = 220.
Now, expressing рқ‘Ҙ= ГҚ15
рқ‘ҳ=0 рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳrequires 15 addition gates. Since
we need to split 4 labels per gate, the total number of addition gates
for the splits is 15 Г— 4 = 60. Also, the total number of lookups per
gate, for the 8 exponentiations is 8 Г— 16 = 128. The remaining cost
for verifying gрқ‘Ҙis of 15 group operations in ГҺ15
рқ‘ҳ=0 gрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳ, which we
consider next.
Group Operations: Plonk [14] is a natural choice for a ZK-SNARK
to be used with a lookup table. We instantiate it using the pairing
friendly curve BN128 and Baby Jubjub Edward curve [30] defined
over the scalar field of BN128. The following is the formula for the
group operation in the curve:
(рқ‘Ҙ3,рқ‘Ұ3) = (рқ‘Ҙ1,рқ‘Ұ1) + (рқ‘Ҙ2,рқ‘Ұ2) =
 рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ұ2 + рқ‘Ҙ2рқ‘Ұ1
1 + рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ҙ2рқ‘Ұ1рқ‘Ұ2
, рқ‘Ұ1рқ‘Ұ2 вҲ’рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ҙ2
1 вҲ’рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ҙ2рқ‘Ұ1рқ‘Ұ2

where (рқ‘Ҙ1,рқ‘Ұ1) and (рқ‘Ҙ2,рқ‘Ұ2) are the coordinates of the two group
points and рқ‘‘is the вҖңtwist.вҖқ The following gates in the Plonk system
can be used for verifying the group operation formula:
рқ‘ҘвҖІ = рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ҙ2
рқ‘ҰвҖІ = рқ‘Ұ1рқ‘Ұ2
рқ‘§1 = рқ‘Ҙ1рқ‘Ұ2
рқ‘§2 = рқ‘Ҙ2рқ‘Ұ1
рқ‘§3 = 1 + рқ‘‘рқ‘ҘвҖІрқ‘ҰвҖІ
рқ‘§4 = 2рқ‘Ұ3 вҲ’рқ‘Ұ3рқ‘§3
рқ‘§4 = рқ‘ҰвҖІ вҲ’рқ‘ҘвҖІ
рқ‘§5 = рқ‘Ҙ3рқ‘§3
рқ‘§5 = рқ‘§1 + рқ‘§2
Each group operation computed as above uses 9 binary gates вҖ“
7 multiplication gates (which are allowed to include addition too,
as in Plonk) and 2 addition gates. So, the total number of addition
and multiplication gates for the 8 exponentiations in each gate is
8 Г— 15 Г— 2 = 240 and 8 Г— 15 Г— 7 = 840, respectively.
Remaining costs: After computing the exponentiations, we must
verify that the product of the matrix M with the vector [a b c]
satisfies the condition required in EC-gateGb. Computing M =
[рқҗҙрқҗөрқҗ¶] involves 8 squarings (of рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘ рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘ўрқ‘Ҹfor рқ‘ҸвҲҲ{0, 1}) for
computing рқҗҙ, рқҗө, and further 16 multiplications for computing рқҗ¶=
рқҗҙвҠҷрқҗө. Computing рқҗҙa and рқҗөb each involves a 8 multiplications and
6 additions (since rows repeat) while рқҗ¶c involves 16 multiplications
and 12 additions; the overall matrix-vector multiplication рқҗҙa+рқҗөb+
рқҗ¶c uses 8 more additions. Overall, these costs come to 8 + 16 + 16 +
16 = 56 multiplications and 12 + 12 + 8 = 32 additions.

Debasish Ray Chawdhuri and Manoj Prabhakaran
Hence, the total number of addition gates required per garbled
gate is 60 + 240 + 32 = 332 and the total number of multiplication
gates per garbled gate is 840 + 56 = 896.
8
Zero-Knowledge Proof for Oblivious Transfer
Recall that in the mkSol algorithm in Section 4, the garbler uses an
OT protocol to transfer labels for each input wire of the circuit. The
protocol is not secure unless the garbler proves the correctness of
this step. The OT involves the garbler encrypting both the values,
but the public keys are generated in a way that the evaluator can
only decrypt one of them. Hence, the garbler simply has to prove
that it correctly encrypted both the labels for each wire. One ap-
proach is to use an arbitrary OT protocol and generically prove
that the encryptions are correct as well.
However, this approach requires that the garbler creates arith-
metic circuit for the exponentiation of the public keys. This would
require a huge number of gates and increase the prover time. In-
stead, we take the following approach:
вҖў The garbler creates commitments to each label that can be opened
by exponentiating fixed curve points. The circuit for this can use
lookup tables for optimization.
вҖў These commitments are shared to the verifier along with the OT
messages.
вҖў We create a separate proof using Bulletproof [9] to show that
the OT correctly encrypts the committed values.
For OT, we can use the protocol of Peikert et. al. [27]. This
protocol allows an OT of either of two points on an elliptic curve.
Any input label must be a random label from Fрқ‘һ. Given a random
u, v вҶҗG, the receiver can obtain a label рқӣјВ· x(u) + рқӣҪВ· x(v) for
uniformly chosen, but public рқӣј, рқӣҪвҶҗFрқ‘һ. The method of OT is as
described below -
(1) During initial setup, a CRS (g0, h0, g1, h1) вҲҲG4 is decided.
(2) For the input рқ‘Ҹof the receiver, the receiver chooses рқ‘ҰвҶҗFрқ‘һ
and sends (r, s) = (gрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘Ҹ, hрқ‘Ұ
рқ‘Ҹ) to the sender.
(3) Let the senders inputs be v0, v1 вҲҲG. The sender chooses рқ‘ ,рқ‘ЎвҶҗ
Fрқ‘һand computes (eрқ‘ҸвҖІ, fрқ‘ҸвҖІ) = (gрқ‘ 
рқ‘ҸвҖІhрқ‘Ў
рқ‘ҸвҖІ, rрқ‘ sрқ‘Ўvрқ‘ҸвҖІ) for each рқ‘ҸвҖІ вҲҲ
{0, 1}.
(4) Receiver decrypts vрқ‘Ҹ= fрқ‘Ҹeрқ‘ҰвҲ’1
рқ‘Ҹ
.
Using two such transfers, a random label of an input can be sent
to the receiver. To commit the labels, we commit the curve points
that construct the labels. For every label, two random coefficients
рқӣј, рқӣҪand generated and two random points u, v are chosen. The
label is then рқӣјВ· x(рқ‘ў) + рқӣҪВ· x(v). To commit a curve point w, we
use ElGamal encryption. The garbler chooses a global private key
рқ‘Ҙand a corresponding public key (g, x). The commitment of the
curve point is then (c, d) = (gрқ‘Ұ, xрқ‘Ұw).
вҖў CRS: Since we want to use bulletproof and we need public ver-
ifiability, we need a different CRS for each copy of the OT. For
each input рқ‘–вҲҲ{1..рқ‘ӣ}, two curve points uрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–, vрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–need to be sent
through OT for each input value рқ‘ҸвҲҲ0, 1. The CRS for the рқ‘–рқ‘Ўв„Һin-
put is (gрқ‘–0, hрқ‘–0, gрқ‘–1, hрқ‘–1, gвҖІ
рқ‘–0, gвҖІ
рқ‘–1, hвҖІ
рқ‘–0, hвҖІ
рқ‘–1) вҶҗG8. We also have four
randomly generated ElGamal public key pairs (lрқ‘–0, pрқ‘–0), (lрқ‘–1, pрқ‘–1),
(lвҖІ
рқ‘–0, pвҖІ
рқ‘–0), (lвҖІ
рқ‘–1, pвҖІ
рқ‘–1)) for each input рқ‘–. Note that the private key for
the ElGamal encryption is never known to anyone.
It is possible to use the same set of points for the public keys
that we use for constructing gates. That way we can share the
same lookup tables for exponentiation.
вҖў Oblivious Transfer: The oblivious transfer of each curve point
is done using the PVW protocol.
вҖў Commitment to the labels: The commitments to the label is
is achieved by ElGamal encrypting each of the points separately.
(1) Each label is generated in the following manner - we have
(рқӣјрқ‘–0, рқӣҪрқ‘–0, рқӣјрқ‘–1, рқӣҪрқ‘–1) вҶҗFрқ‘һ. The label Kрқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–= рқӣјрқ‘–рқ‘ҸВ· x(uрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ) + рқӣҪрқ‘–рқ‘ҸВ·
x(vрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ) is generated for each input рқ‘–and рқ‘ҸвҲҲ{0, 1}.
(2) The points uрқ‘–0, uрқ‘–1, vрқ‘–0, vрқ‘–1 are encrypted using ElGamal. The
garbler chooses рқ‘ҹрқ‘–0,рқ‘ҹрқ‘–1,рқ‘ҹвҖІ
рқ‘–0,рқ‘ҹвҖІ
рқ‘–1 from Fрқ‘һ. Then computes
(cрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ, dрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ) = (lрқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ, pрқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹuрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ) and (cвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ, dвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ) = (lвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ, pвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹvрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ).
The ElGamal encryptions are shared with the receiver and
are used in the zero-knowledge proof for correctness (рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘ҹвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
are used as witness).
вҖў Oblivious Transfer: We use the PVW protocol mentioned above
for OT. We can denote the randomness used as рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹfor trans-
ferring uрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹand рқ‘ вҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘ЎвҖІ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹfor transferring vрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ.
вҖў Proof of correctness of the OT: We use the CRS double as
the CRS for Bulletproof. For each input рқ‘–, the garbler needs to
prove that there exists рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ,рқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹsuch that cрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ= lрқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ, fрқ‘–рқ‘ҸdвҲ’1
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ=
rрқ‘ рқ‘–
рқ‘–рқ‘ рқ‘Ўрқ‘–
рқ‘–pвҲ’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
, eрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ= gрқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹhрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҹand also the same relationships for vрқ‘–рқ‘Ҹ.
9
Conclusion
The main conceptual contribution of this work is to introduce Secret-
Carrying Puzzles (OxSP) as a versatile tool that brings the power
of secure 2-party computation to a blockchain setting. We showed
that OxSP can be instantiated using Garbled Circuits and ZK proofs.
This construction is fairly efficient, as long as the ZK proofs can be
generated efficiently.
To that end, we present a novel garbling scheme optimized to
minimize the number of arithmetic gates required to compute each
gate. The main technical contribution of this work is to design this
garbling scheme and to show how to generate ZK proofs for it
efficiently.
We leave it for future work to support garbled circuit optimiza-
tion techniques (see, e.g., [19]) that have been developed without
support for proofs.