Automated formal analysis of Signal’s Double Ratchet:
attacks, fixes and security proofs
April 13th, 2026 – v1⋆
Vincent Cheval
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
Charlie Jacomme
Universit´e de Lorraine, CNRS, Inria, LORIA
France
Jessica Richards
University of Oxford
United Kingdom
Abstract
The Double Ratchet (DR) protocol is a core security component of several end-to-end encrypted communications
services, primarily Signal Messenger, WhatsApp, and Facebook Messenger, servicing billions of users. In this work, we
provide the first formal analysis of the DR covering all of its features, including out-of-order message arrivals. This
analysis is highly automated, allows for all possible key compromises and notably proves Post-Compromise Security
(PCS). We also provide partial results for the security of more complex protocol variants, these being the extension of
the DR with encrypted headers, and composition with PQXDH as the initial key-exchange.
Our analysis uncovered three attacks on the protocol, two of which we confirmed to be present in the main
implementation, and a third which exists in the specification. Each of these attacks weakened or broke Forward
Secrecy, and are to the best of our knowledge the first such known attacks. In each case, the issues were reported to
the Signal developers and subsequently fixed. Overall, our analysis provides new guarantees of the security of Signal
Messenger, and demonstrates the high level of security provided by the DR under a variety of strong threat models.
1. Introduction
Signal Messenger is an end-to-end encrypted messaging application based on three core components: PQXDH, the initial
key-exchange; the Double Ratchet (DR), a ratcheting mechanism to generate distinct keys for each encrypted message;
and Sesame, an application layer protocol that handles multiple devices and sessions between users. It aims to be widely
deployable and usable, supporting asynchronous communications, multiple devices, and out-of-order delivery. It also promises
strong security guarantees, even under strong compromise scenarios. The underlying security protocol is thus a complex,
highly stateful protocol with many different levels of key derivations. Similarly, the target security properties are complicated
to express, having both Forward Secrecy (FS), where a compromise does not enable the attacker to decrypt past messages,
and Post-Compromise Security (PCS), where even after a compromise, if the attacker does not interfere during a time-frame,
the conversation heals and messages become secure again.
Due to the widespread usage of the core library implementing the corresponding protocol, it has garnered a lot of attention
from the research community, which delivered several pen-and-paper security analyses [1], [2], [3], as well as several
computer-aided analyses [4], [5], [6], [7] based on formal methods and automated verification tools such as TAMARIN [8],
CRYPTOVERIF [9], and PROVERIF [10]. These analyses have built a strong understanding of the security properties that
can be expected from Signal, and proved its security in a variety of threat models and scenarios. Through these analyses,
several weaknesses in both the PCS of Signal and in the post-quantum resistance of the first specification of PQXDH were
uncovered. However, none of these works identified weaknesses in the forward secrecy of Signal.
Despite those analyses, several blind spots remained due to the complexity of the protocols putting comprehensive
proofs out of the reach of automated analysis tools at the time. For this reason, the full specification of the Double Ratchet
was never analysed, and neither was the interplay between PQXDH, the DR, and Sesame. Due to recent improvements
in PROVERIF, notably better support for lemmas and stateful protocols, we are able to present in this paper the first full
analysis of the DR using PROVERIF, yielding several security proofs and weaknesses.
We note that the bulk of our analysis was carried out before October 2025, when Signal introduced the Triple Ratchet, an
extension where the Diffie-Hellman based DR is accompanied by a post-quantum secure ratchet dubbed SPQR. Following
the classical post-quantum hybridization pattern of communication protocols, Signal’s security should not be negatively
impacted even if SPQR is completely insecure. In our analysis, we explicitly model an insecure SPQR, and demonstrate
this does not affect the security guarantees.
⋆: An extended abstract of this paper appears at IEEE S&P’26; this is the full version.
1

Contributions. Our core contributions are twofold:
•
We provide the first complete and automated analysis of the Double Ratchet protocol, leading to the first automated
proof of PCS and FS with fine-grained specification of compromises.
•
We uncovered three attacks on the forward secrecy of Signal, one over the specification only, which was found fully
automatically by PROVERIF, and two over the implementation that PROVERIF hinted at, but which were found in
a more manual fashion. To the best of our knowledge, those are the first weaknesses over the forward secrecy of
Signal to be reported.
Our PROVERIF model includes features such as skipped messages and header encryption, and we express all security
properties in the most precise way possible, modelling and tracking precisely which compromises of which material and
intermediate keys enables an attacker to decrypt messages.
The model was as much as possible developed to be a straightforward translation of the specification, and the proofs
required several person-months of work by PROVERIF experts to successfully complete. Overall, our analysis increases the
understanding of the precise security guarantees provided by Signal, and we join a body of works that provides proofs of
the security of Signal’s underlying components and advocates for its security.
All our PROVERIF models can be found at [11], along with reproducibility instructions.
Related Work on the Double Ratchet. We first explore the related works which analysed the DR, and summarise the
main differences between such works and our work in Table 1. Some of the main points where models differ are: in which
attacker model the analysis took place; whether the analysis was mechanized through a tool or pen-and-paper; and whether
the DR was analysed for a bounded or unbounded number of asymmetric ratchet steps. Additionally, to consider faithfulness
of a model to the specification, we specify whether the analysis supported out-of-order message arrivals. Supporting this
feature results in a more complex analysis, as skipped message keys must be stored in long term memory until they are used.
In addition, the state for a sending participant must still keep track of the previous receiving chain-key, further increasing
state complexity.
The pen-and-paper analyses of Signal such as [1], [2], [3], [12], [13], [14] consider the DR (sometimes composed with
X3DH), and define several variants of security, either in the game-based setting or the ideal functionality setting. Those
analyses often perform simplifications, for instance by not modelling the storage of message keys enabling out-of-order
decryption (see [1, Section 6]), or by omitting some options of the specification such as header encryption. Finally, compared
to computer-aided cryptography, it is very difficult to ascertain the correctness of pen-and-paper proofs. Given the strong
high-level differences between the pen-and-paper and computer-aided approach, we do not describe in detail the subtler
differences between these pen-and-paper analyses, and only provide in Table 1 the most salient points we mentioned. We
note that the level of detail provided by [14], which covers the DR among other examples and contributions, does not allow
us to clearly ascertain the exact protocol model compared to the other mentioned works, but, as it claims to follow [1], it
does not cover out-of-order decryption nor header encryption.
Among the computer-aided analyses of the DR, [5] studied (a small variant of) X3DH in CRYPTOVERIF, and the
composition of X3DH and up to 3 messages of DR in PROVERIF, thus yielding an execution model which only allows
bounded executions. Their analysis proves forward secrecy, as well as future secrecy. The latter ensures that, once an agent
derives a key at step n, compromising its state at any earlier step n −i does not enable an attacker to recover the current
key. In the real world, past states cannot be leaked as they no longer exist. However, this provides a simple way to model
a realistic scenario in which the state is leaked to an active attacker at step n −i, but the attacker subsequently becomes
passive and is unable to exploit this state until after step n. In this way, giving the compromised state to the attacker earlier
and making the attacker passive is equivalent to only giving the compromised state later on. This property is a variant of
PCS with a very strong requirement for the healing: the attacker must be fully passive between the compromise state and
the later key we want to prove secret. The more general notion of PCS typically considered, in particular in our work, is
that to heal, the adversary just needs to be passive for one step somewhere in between the compromise and the later key,
rather than throughout the entire interval.
The DR was also studied in the DY* framework [6], thus yielding an executable implementation with security guar-
antees attached. However, this analysis did not consider some features like out-of-order decryption or header encryption.
Furthermore, we note that they refer to PCS, but in fact prove something akin to the previously mentioned future secrecy.
Indeed, they state that for a root key RKn: “If an active attacker compromises RKn before we compute RKn+1, we get no
guarantees for RKn+1”. For clarity, as both [5] and [6] prove a similar weaker notion of PCS, we refer to this property as
weak PCS (wPCS) in Table 1.
Finally, in very recent work [15], the DR was studied with TAMARIN when composed with X3DH without one time
prekeys, and for the DR without our-of-order decryption nor header encryption support. Furthermore, they prove a property
close to forward secrecy, and only enable compromise of DH private keys and not of the states of the agents, which contains
the root key and chain keys.
2

Papers
Protocol
Model Mechanization
Unbounded
Execution
Out-of-order Decryption
Header
Encryption
PCS
Compromises
[1], [13] [14] X3DH+DR Comp.
✘
✓
✘
✘
✓
All
[2], [3], [12]
DR
Comp.
✘
✓
✘
✘
✓
All
[5]
X3DH+DR
Symb.
PROVERIF
✘(≤3 ratchets)
✘
✘
✘(FS&wPCS)
All
[6]
X3DH+DR
Symb.
DY*
✓
✘
✘
✘(FS&wPCS)
All
[15]
X3DH-+DR Symb.
TAMARIN
✓
✘
✘
✘(FS)
DH keys only
Our models
DR
DR
Symb.
PROVERIF
✓
✓
✘
✓
All
DR-HE
DR
Symb.
PROVERIF
✓
✓
✓
✘(FS)
All
DR-HE*
DR
Symb.
PROVERIF
✓
✓
✓
✓
All but DHs
DR-PQXDH* PQXDH+DR Symb.
PROVERIF
✘(single session
but unbounded ratchet)
✓
✘
✓
All, but DHs
or PQXDH
TABLE 1. COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR MODELS AND RELATED-WORK ANALYSIS ON THE DOUBLE RATCHET.
WE DENOTE COMP. AND SYMB., FOR THE COMPUTATIONAL AND SYMBOLIC MODEL RESPECTIVELY. X3DH- IS X3DH WITHOUT ONE-TIME
PREKEYS. IF THE MODEL DOES NOT ALLOW UNBOUNDED EXECUTION, WE MENTION THE NUMBER OF RATCHETING STEPS ALLOWED. THE “ALL”
COMPROMISE MEANS THAT ANY VALUE STORED IN THE CURRENT STATE OF AN AGENT MUST BE COMPROMISABLE, WHICH INCLUDES THE CURRENT
ROOT KEY, THE CURRENT CHAIN KEY, THE CURRENT PRIVATE DH KEY, AND ADDITIONALLY, WHEN OUT-OF-ORDER DECRYPTION IS MODELLED, THE
PREVIOUS CHAIN KEY AND ANY SKIPPED AND UNUSED MESSAGE KEYS. WE REFER TO SECTIONS 4 AND 5 FOR MORE DETAILS ON OUR MODELS.
Additional related work. Related to Signal’s analysis, PQXDH was analysed in isolation in [4] with CRYPTOVERIF and
PROVERIF, but without any consideration for the DR. We build upon their PROVERIF models to work towards an analysis of
the composition of PQXDH and the DR. Finally, the interactions between Sesame and the DR were verified using TAMARIN
in [7], but to enable the analysis of Sesame they had to rely on a very high level and abstracted version of the DR.
Beyond the DR in particular, PCS has also been verified in the context of computer-aided cryptography on other protocols
in a few works, namely on the iMessagePQ3 protocol with TAMARIN [16], on TokenWeaver [17] also with TAMARIN, and
on a toy example of a bounded key derivation in [18] with both TAMARIN and PROVERIF.
2. Presentation of Double Ratchet
We briefly explain the Double Ratchet protocol, touching on additional aspects as relevant to our analysis. A full
specification is available from Signal [19], [20]. For simplicity, we present here a single Double Ratchet session between
an initiator I and a responder R. The initiator sends the first message, but as the protocol evolves after the initial messages,
either one may be the current person sending or receiving messages.
2.1. Double Ratchet
The DR protocol consists of two parts, the symmetric ratchet, which updates each time a new message is sent and
the asymmetric ratchet, which updates each time the sending and receiving roles are swapped. The latter relies on public
Diffie-Hellman (DH) keys sent alongside messages. We summarize in Fig. 1 the full key derivation of the DR, and present
separately below each ratchet.
2.1.1. Asymmetric ratchet. The (simplified) internal state of an agent X running the DR at step i ≥1 depends on:
•
DHsi, the current sender DH ephemeral private key;
•
DHri−1, the current receiver DH ephemeral public key;
•
RKi, the current root key.
Each RKi is used to create a chain key CKi+1
0
, which derives encryption keys for messages from I to R when i is
even, and in the reverse direction if i is odd. In the case i = 0, RK0 is set to an initial shared secret key SK, with the DHs
set to R’s signed pre-key and DHr and CK0
0 set to the value None. Whenever an agent receives DHri+1 over the network,
it computes the next two root keys as follows:
1)
RKi+1 ∥CKi+1
0
= KDFrk(RKi, (DHri+1)DHsi);
2)
generate a fresh DHsi+2 and send its public part;
3)
RKi+2∥CKi+2
0
= KDFrk(RKi+1, (DHri+1)DHsi+2).
If KDFrk is a one way function, then compromising RKi does not affect the secrecy of the previous keys, which intuitively
provides forward secrecy. In addition, as soon as we receive an honestly generated DHri+1 value, RKi+2 is secret even if
the previous keys were compromised, which intuitively provides post-compromise security. Note that at each ratchet step,
we increase our ratchet index by two. This reflects the two steps involved in the ratchet, effectively performing two half
ratchets. A consequence of this is that I will always be on an odd ratchet step, whilst R will always be even.
3

RKi
RKi+1
RKi+2
KDFrk(RKi, (DHri+1)DHsi)
DHri+1
CKri+1
0
CKri+1
1
KDFck
CKri+1
j
. . .
CKri+1
j+1
KDFck
mki+1
0
mki+1
j
KDFrk(RKi+1, (DHri+1)DHsi+2)
DHsi+2
CKsi+2
0
CKsi+2
1
KDFck
CKsi+2
l
. . .
CKsi+2
l+1
KDFck
mki+2
0
mki+2
l
. . .
Figure 1. Key derivation underlying the Double Ratchet. A double-headed arrow represents a communication over the network, either receiving a new
DHr value or sending out a freshly generated public DHs value. A single-headed arrow represents an internal computation, describing how one value is
computed based on previous ones. The KDFrk takes a root key and Diffie-Hellman output and returns a new root key and a chain key. The KDFck takes
a chain key and returns a new chain key and a message key. Whenever a RK, CKr or CKs is input to a key derivation function, it is deleted from the
internal state, and thus, only the rightmost or highest element of each type in this drawing would be stored in the internal state of a device.
2.1.2. Symmetric ratchet. The initial chain keys output by KDFrk form the base of the symmetric ratchet. Similarly to the
root keys, a chain key may be considered sending (CKs) or receiving (CKr) depending on which agent we are considering.
For I, odd i are for sending and even i are for receiving, and this is reversed for R.
From each CKi
j we derive a new chain key and a message key CKi
j+1 ∥mki
j = KDFck(CKi
j). The message key is used
to symmetrically encrypt one message. In particular, assuming all sent messages have been received, the current sender’s
CKs should be the same as the current receiver’s CKr. In the same fashion as the asymmetric ratchet, a one way KDFck
intuitively provides forward secrecy by keeping previous chain and message keys secret even if the current chain key is
compromised.
2.1.3. All together. The (simplified) internal state of an agent X running the DR at step i can be summarized as:
stX = (DHsi, DHri−1, RKi, CKri−1
j
, CKsi
j)
2.2. Extension with Header encryption
In order to communicate ratchet public keys and deal with out-of-order message arrivals, encrypted Signal messages
have a plaintext header sent alongside them. This header contains the current public receiving DH key DHr and the number
of messages sent in the current and previous ratchet step by the sender (n, pn), so the receiver can skip messages as
appropriate.
It may be desirable for a user to hide this information, to obfuscate the number of ratchets that have taken place and the
ordering of messages. So Signal has documentation for how their protocol could be extended with header encryption.
Note that this is not currently implemented in Signal. Header encryption adds an additional four keys to the state,
HKs, NHKs, HKr, NHKr. These are respectively the current / next header keys for sending / receiving. Whenever a message
is sent, the header is symmetrically encrypted with the sender’s HKs and decrypted by the receiver’s HKr or NHKr. The
header keys are updated on each asymmetric ratchet. If a participant is unable to decrypt a header with HKr then they try
NHKr and if the latter is successful this indicates the receiver should perform a ratchet step. During this ratchet step the
next header keys become the current header keys and two new next header keys are derived.
Initially, I and R have two header keys shared, forming I’s HKs and NHKr and R’s NHKr, NHKs. It is not specified
how these values should be agreed upon in composition with PQXDH. To derive subsequent keys, KDFrk is changed to
KDFrk-he which additionally outputs a header key. Thus, we simultaneously derive our sending chain key and our next
sending header key and likewise for receiving keys.
2.3. Integration in Signal Messenger
The Double Ratchet protocol is only one aspect of how Signal sends messages. Two other important aspects are how the
initial secret key SK is derived, and how multiple sessions are handled. The latter is achieved using the Sesame algorithm.
4

An important property is that two devices may have multiple active Double Ratchet sessions between them. When receiving
a ciphertext in this case, it is tested against all possible sessions to decrypt it.
Initial secrets are derived using the Post-Quantum eXtended Diffie-Hellman (PQXDH) protocol. These values for a
Double Ratchet session are the secret key SK and the first DR public key DHs0. This involves Diffie-Hellman calculuations
using several long and short term secrets.
Both parties have a long term identity key (IK) and a medium term signed pre-key (SPK), which is signed with their
identity key. The identity keys are assumed to be authenticated by participants out of band. Finally, participants have several
one-time use pre keys (OPK), as well as a one-time or last resort post-quantum signed pre-key (PQSPK). These are each
Diffie-Hellman keys, except for the PQSPK which are public keys for a Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM). We recall
that given a KEM public key, one can encapsulate against it, producing a shared secret SS as well as a ciphertext that the
owner of the secret key will be able to decapsulate and get SS. the public components of which are published on a Signal
server, with the medium term and one time keys being refreshed as required.
The initiator I contacts the server and retrieves the responder’s IKpk
R , SPKpk
R , PQSPKpk
R and one of the responder’s
OPKpk (if there is one available). Using this, the initiator generates a fresh DH key EKI and uses this to create the SK
as follows, with the fourth argument omitted in the case no OPKpk
R was available, and SS being the result of a KEM
encapsulation against one of the PQSPKpk
R :
H((SPKpk
R )IKsk
I ∥(IKpk
R )EKsk
I ∥(SPKpk
R )EKsk
I ∥(OPKpk
R )EKsk
I ∥SS)
Here Xpk and Xsk represents the public and private part of X respectively.
The initiator then sends the responder EKpk
I , IKpk
I , IKpk
R , SPKpk
R , the ciphertext corresponding to SS, and information
about the OPKR used alongside the first message, so both parties can derive SK. Finally, SPKsk
R is used as DHs0.
3. Breaking forward secrecy
In the course of our analysis, we identified three distinct ways to break or weaken the forward secrecy of the DR, one
that only concerned the specification, and two which were present in the implementation. After interaction with Signal’s
developers, all the attacks led to updates on the specification and implementation.
3.1. Attack on the specification
We provide below an excerpt from the specification of the decryption function (given in Python code in [19]), only
keeping the most relevant lines, and expanding the call to the function RatchetReceiveKey.
1
def RatchetDecrypt(state, header, ciphertext, AD):
2
...
3
if header.dh != state.DHr:
4
...
5
DHRatchet(state, header)
6
...
7
state.CKr, mk = KDF_CK(state.CKr)
8
...
9
return DECRYPT(mk, ciphertext, ...)
Here, we see that whenever we receive a message with a new DH element in the header, we must perform a ratchet,
then apply the KDF_CK to the receiving chain key CKr and then decrypt. According to the specification, given a shared
symmetric key SK and some DH value DHs, the initial state of R is st0 = (DHs, None, SK, None, None). We normally
expect that the first message received should trigger a ratchet, so st0 is never used directly for decryption. However, inside
Python, None is a value that might be parsed and received over the network. So, by building a header with DH element
header.dh = None, notice how the RatchetDecrypt function skips the ratcheting step as the test in line 3 fails, and
directly computes the message key as state.CKr, mk = KDF_CK(None). This is a public value, and thus an attacker can
produce valid ciphertexts for this key. We can then break authentication and secrecy of the first message decrypted by R
in this setting.
Severity. As mentioned, this issue only concerned the specification. Yet, an implementer strictly following the specification
could have produced an insecure instance, notably assuming that the HMAC implementation would accept None as a key.
The issue here comes from using a loosely typed language to describe the specifications, and over whether None is a
value with a domain fully separate from the rest of the world or not. While browsing online, we did not find any DR
implementation that suffered from this issue. This is mainly because the DR is generally preceded by a key-exchange that
produces a slightly different initial DR state that does not suffer from the described issue. However, we stress that an
implementation strictly following the specification would have been completely insecure.
5

Discovery. This attack was automatically found by PROVERIF. As we tried to follow the DR specification as closely as
possible in our models, the tool directly gave us an attack trace where a responder decrypted an attacker produced message
using a None key. This attack was not discovered by previous analysis of the DR because the DR was never analysed by
itself, but only in composition with PQXDH, where the states are initialised differently.
Fix. Solving this issue is straightforward: one only needs to make sure that KDF_CK fails when receiving None, or that the
ratchet is always triggered at the initial step, or that None can never be received inside the header. The Signal developers
acknowledged the issue, which was fixed in the revision 4 of the DR specification in November 2025, by adding to the
specification of the KDF_CK(ck) that “If ck is None this function must fail in a way that terminates processing.” (see [19,
page 18, revision 4]).
3.2. Attacks on the implementation
We present here the real-world attacks on the forward secrecy of Signal that we uncovered.
3.2.1. Weak states forced storage.
Identifying weak-states. When composed with PQXDH, a DR state on R’s side is initialised in six sequential steps:
A.1)
Receive a PQXDH message from I, made up of two sub messages (m, ct), where m contains the public keys
EKpk
I , IKpk
I , IKpk
R , SPKpk
R ; identifiers for PQSPKR, OPKR; and ct, which is the first encrypted message of the DR;
A.2)
Run PQXDH to compute a shared key SK using the corresponding SPKsk
R;
A.3)
Initialise a DR state
st0 = (SPKsk
R, None, SK, None, None);
A.4)
Process the ciphertext ct, which is both the ciphertext confirmation of PQXDH and the first ciphertext of the DR
exchange;
A.5)
This triggers two steps of the ratchet, generating a fresh DHs2, and producing some DR state
st2 = (DHs2, DHr1, RK2, CKr1
0, CKs2
0);
A.6)
The ct can now be decrypted with the first message key derived from CKr1
0. If the decryption of ct fails, we should
abort the initialization and not store anything in memory, otherwise, st2 with CKr1
1 instead of CKr1
0 is saved.
In this execution, notice that st0 is a state that contains the private key SPKsk
R, and this SPKR is shared between all
PQXDH exchanges during an epoch. After the deprecation of SPKR and thus its deletion from memory, it is expected that
all the sessions that were established using this key are forward secure: even a full compromise of the current state of a
device must not enable one to recompute the past SKs.
Now, if some st0 is saved in memory, this violates the previous statement: the private part of SPKR might be copied
in a distinct place in a memory, and thus stored and kept in memory even after any trace of this value should have been
deleted from memory. And then, the compromise of the inner state of a device can lead to the compromise of a past SPKR.
With this in mind, we thus refer to the st0 state as a “weak-state”, as it should never be saved in memory.
Saving a weak-state. Recall that based on Sesame, when receiving a ciphertext ct, instead of simply trying to decrypt ct
with the current DR session, we try to decrypt ct with a list of possible DR sessions. While this makes sense when simply
trying to decrypt a DR ciphertext, it leads to an attack if this is done for the ciphertext meant to act as the key confirmation
for PQXDH. Indeed, when looking at the implementation, which implements PQXDH, the DR, and Sesame all together,
we discovered that instead of applying step A.6, if the decryption of ct failed, st2 was forgotten but not st0, and then
other potential decryption sessions were tried. Further, if the decryption succeeded for a different session than the one we
are creating, everything was committed to memory, including the weak state st0.
Attack trace. An attacker can make the responder R save SPKsk
R in its long term memory using the following attack trace:
B.1)
Run as initiator PQXDH with SPKpk
R , which produces (m0, ct0) and a DR session S1;
B.2)
Encrypt a second message using the new DR session, producing ct1;
B.3)
Run freshly as initiator PQXDH with SPKpk
R , which produces (m′
0, ct′
0) and a second DR session S2;
B.4)
Send to R first (m0, ct0), and then (m′
0, ct1).
R will process the first message and obtain S1, then process m′
0, get a weak state st′
0 corresponding to S2, then try
to decrypt ct1 with S2, which fails, but then try to decrypt ct1 with S1, which succeeds, and thus everything is committed
to memory, including st0. We confirmed this behaviour by writing a Rust test inside libsignal, which demonstrated that R
was copying SPKsk
R inside its memory.
Here, we presented this as if R would accept PQXDH sessions initialised by the attacker, and thus the attacker must own
an identity trusted by R. However, an untrusted machine-in-the-middle attacker can also intercept the messages produced
by other initiators trying to reach R and mount the attack, as it only requires mixing two distinct messages together.
6

Severity. Looking back to the computation of SK, out of the 5 secret elements in its derivation, the first three can be
recomputed by an attacker that later learns the corresponding SPKsk
R. Then, the forward secrecy hinges on the DH one-time
prekey OPKR, which is optional, and the shared secrecy from Kyber, SS. In the current hybridization of PQXDH and
the DR, it is expected that it provides forward secrecy, either only using security assumptions over the curve X25519, or
only using Kyber based assumptions. Our attack violates this property, as under the assumption that Kyber is insecure and
X25519 is secure, an attacker can first force a user to store in memory SPKsk
R even after its deprecation, then in the case of
a later compromise of the device state, learn SPKsk
R. It can thereby recompute the SK of all sessions that relied on SPKR
and did not use an OPK if Kyber is insecure, and thus recompute all the message keys mk1
j of the first receiving chain of
those sessions. Note that in an untrusted server setting, the server can make it so that one-time prekeys are never used. We
stress that our attack does not affect the secrecy or authentication of the messages in the absence of key compromise, and
are thus in an advanced threat model.
Discovery. This attack was not fully automatically found in PROVERIF, notably because we do not model the required
Sesame components. However, while trying to model the composition of PQXDH with the DR we made a model that
overapproximated the attacker’s power, hoping it would be simpler to verify, by removing the key confirmation that takes
place during PQXDH and instead relying solely on the key confirmation provided by the DR. This modelling gave us
an attack trace, illustrating that an unconfirmed DR state produced by PQXDH should never be stored and amenable
to compromise, as it contains a copy of SPKsk
R (a PROVERIF model illustrating this attack trace can be found in our
artifact [11]). PROVERIF thus gave us the hindsight that what we called ‘weak-states’ exists and should never be stored.
Through several code inspections with this hindsight in mind, we were able to discover how to make Signal store a weak
state in practise.
Fix. The intuitive fix is to never try to decrypt ct with other sessions in the case of a new session initialization. Along with
a proof of concept in Rust demonstrating that the official libsignal implementation did suffer from this issue, this fix was
proposed to the Signal developers at the end of March 2025, and pushed inside the main branch of Signal a week later1,
and was then part of a responsible disclosure process with Meta for 5 months.
3.2.2. Replay attacks. Replay attacks are an inherent concern in PQXDH. Due to its asynchronous design, sessions built
without an OPKR lack any fresh randomness from R. This is a well-known fact mentioned in the PQXDH specification,
which recommends implementing mitigation measures. In particular, incorporating a DR-like mechanism helps reduce the
impact of potential replay attacks. In the libsignal implementation, some replay attacks are thwarted as R will not process
twice messages that use the same EKpk
I .
Small subgroup attack. X25519 is not a prime order group, and so called point-mangling attacks are possible (see e.g. [21]).
Without delving into the mathematics behind it, for any EKpk
I , there exists a simple algorithm that yields a second distinct
EK∗
I
pk, but such that for any honest secret key SPKsk
R, (EKpk
I )SPKsk
R = (EK∗
I
pk)SPKsk
R. We can then easily mount a replay
attack as follows:
C.1)
Intercept any PQXDH message (m, ct) meant for R, and produce m∗by swapping EKpk
I
by EK∗
I
pk. Forward in a
row (m, ct) and (m∗, ct) to R.
C.2)
R computes two distinct sessions, both with the same SK, and then the same CKr1
0 storing two states:
st2 = (DHs2, DHr1, RK2, CKr1
0, CKs2
0)
st′
2 = (DHs′2, DHr1, RK′2, CKr1
0, CKs′2
0)
Severity. A replay attack leads to the initialization of two sessions with the same SK and then the same CKr1
0. The
compromise of the replayed session can then be used to break the forward secrecy of all the message keys mk1
j with j > 0
(the first message key mk1
0 is still safely ratcheted forward in the copied session when it processes the first ciphertext). Such
replay attacks break FS in a common scenario, for any sessions without any OPK and using the last-resort PQSPK. Note
that in a scenario with a dishonest server, this can be the case for all sessions.
Discovery. Our standalone DR ratchet naturally required uniqueness of the SK for each session in order to prove FS or PCS.
When attempting to compose with PQXDH, we effectively uncovered an attack on forward secrecy, as the PQXDH model
did not account for replay protection (a PROVERIF model illustrating this attack trace can be found in our artifact [11]).
Thus, PROVERIF gave us the hindsight that replay attacks on PQXDH can actually lead to a loss of FS, which in turn led
us to investigate the concrete status of replay attacks on PQXDH and to carefully review the code.
1. https://github.com/signalapp/libsignal/commit/cd361186fba60c83186262d91b03af608fb8c7c3
7

Fix. It is possible to detect that we are receiving a mangled key, by checking if the key is “torsion-free” [21]. We reported
this issue, once again with a small Rust proof of concept illustrating that the replay attack was indeed possible in libsignal,
and with the recommendation to add the torsion free check. This was promptly pushed to libsignal in under a week2.
Following our warning, Signal developers also discovered another way EKI could be mangled to create an equivalent key,
also fixed in the same commit.
3.2.3. Combining both. The two previous attacks enabled us to:
•
Force the long-term storage of some fresh SK using the weak state attack;
•
Create a duplicate session using the same SK as a target session using the replay attack.
As a final variant, we could in fact combine the two previous independent attacks into one, and make a target user store
for the long term the SK of a session of their choice.
D.1)
Intercept any session initialization message (m, ct) meant for R, as well as another ct′ meant for R.
D.2)
Mangle m into m∗using the small subgroup attack. Then, send in a row (m, ct) and (m, ct′).
Compared with the replay attack, this also compromises the FS of mk1
0, that is, of the first message received by R and
corresponding to ct. Hence, we were able to break the FS of all the messages sent in the first exchange from I to R, for
sessions without an OPKR and using the last-resort PQSPKR. This attack variant was of course fixed by solving both
previous issues.
4. ProVerif model
We begin with a brief introduction to PROVERIF and discuss the challenges involved in faithfully translating the Signal
specification, along with its intended security properties, into the tool’s syntax. The resulting model is quite large and covers
all aspects of the protocols. In this section, our focus will be on how states and the skipped-message features of Signal are
represented. Although PROVERIF is capable of automatically analyzing many models, it cannot directly draw conclusions
for complex ones such as ours. For this reason, we also explain in this section how we guided PROVERIF in order to obtain
our proofs.
4.1. Modelling the Signal protocol
4.1.1. Background. PROVERIF [10] is a tool for automated verification of cryptographic protocols in the symbolic model
against a Dolev-Yao attacker. Informally, this means the attacker can see and manipulate any message passed along the
network on public channels.
Cryptographic primitives. The symbolic approach abstracts messages as terms, which capture the way messages are
constructed rather than their concrete bit-level values. As such, cryptographic primitives are represented by function symbols,
and their behaviour is idealised through an equational theory or a set of rewrite rules. For example, symmetric encryption
can be modelled using a constructor–destructor pair:
fun encrypt(message,key):bitstring.
fun decrypt(bitstring,key):message
reduc forall k:key,msg:message;
decrypt(encrypt(msg, k), k) = msg.
Here, encrypt acts as a constructor and decrypt as a destructor, with the single rewrite rule expressing that decryption
inverts encryption when the same key is used. By specifying only this equation, we assume an idealised setting: decryption
is possible only with the correct key, ciphertexts reveal no information about the plaintext (e.g., length or structure), and no
other algebraic properties are exploitable.
Input language. The input to PROVERIF is a protocol specified in the applied π-calculus. This calculus resembles a
functional programming language, featuring variables as well as if and let statements. Communication over the network
is modelled by synchronous message passing on named channels, using the constructs in and out to receive and send
messages respectively. The PROVERIF language also provides operators tailored to cryptographic modelling. For instance,
the new operator generates a fresh value of a given type, representing random secret keys or other private data. The event
constructs allow us to add annotations, invisible to the attacker, which are useful to express security properties. As an
illustration, the process System below specifies the execution of an unbounded number of Signal Double Ratchet (DR)
sessions in our model:
2. https://github.com/signalapp/libsignal/commit/5293caa6cad81566b80f3c3731857bedaa78737b
8

let System =
!
(* Attacker decides participants *)
in(att, (I:id, R:id));
(* Data obtained from PQXDH *)
let key_pair = generate_dh() in
new RK:root_key;
let AD = idPair(I,R) in
(* Internal identifier for states *)
new s_id:session_id;
(* Participant session identifiers *)
let s_infoI = session(s_id,I,R) in
let s_infoR = session(s_id,R,I) in
(* Event for queries *)
event SPK(s_infoR, key_pair);
let KeyPair(_,pub_key) = key_pair in
out(att,pub_key);
I_DR(s_infoI,RK,pub_key,AD)
| R_DR(s_infoR,RK,key_pair,AD).
The operator ! denotes replication of the process. With att being declared as a public channel, the construct in(att,
(I:id, R:id)) asks the attacker to supply a pair of agent identifiers that will initiate a DR session. The declarations
new RK:root_key and new s_id:session_id specify the generation of fresh values: a root key and a session identifier,
the latter serving to model session state. The event SPK(s_infoR, key_pair) indicates that a new session between R
and I has started with key_pair being the DH keys of R. Finally, the construct I_DR(s_infoI,...) | R_DR(...)
launches the two processes I_DR and R_DR concurrently, each instantiated wit

[…middle truncated for length…]

DH keys of healing session is compromised *)
(r_idx_comp < r_idx_heal &&
(event(CompromiseDHs(sinfoR, dhr_prv’, r_idx’+2))) ||
(event(CompromiseDHs(sinfoS, dhs_prv’, r_idx_heal))))))
Figure 4. PROVERIF encoding of post-compromise security on the sender’s side for the Signal Protocol.
Lemmas and proof by induction. A now standard way to handle proofs in complex models with loops is to use lemmas
together with PROVERIF’s ability to prove queries by induction. Since the protocol loops around mutable internal states,
we configure PROVERIF to prove FS and PCS by induction over the time step at which the facts in the premises of the
queries occur. This prevents PROVERIF from attempting to explore an infinite chain of keys, and thereby ensures termination.
Intuitively, PROVERIF inductively assumes that a participant has reached some internal state, typically represented by an
input such as:
in(state_chan(sinfo), cell(st,r_idx,m_idx,rcv_idx))
and then attempts to prove the queries for the next value of the mutable state.
However, this approach alone is insufficient, as PROVERIF has no built-in knowledge of the structure of mutable states:
it only assumes their existence. To overcome this, we must supply PROVERIF with invariants describing the properties of
mutable states. This is achieved through the use of lemmas, a feature introduced in [22]. Lemmas are auxiliary queries that
PROVERIF first proves and then uses in the proofs of the main queries (FS and PCS). For example, the lemma
lemma
mess(state_ch(s),cell(st,r_idx,m_idx,rcv_idx)) &&
mess(state_ch(s),cell(st’,r_idx’,m_idx’,rcv_idx’)) &&
DHs(st) = DHs(st’) ==>
DHr(st) = Dhr(st’) && r_idx = r_idx’ && PN(st) = PN(st’) && RK(st) = RK(st’).
states that if two instances of a mutable state for the same user share the same sending Diffie-Hellman key (DHs(st) =
DHs(st’)), then they must also share the ratchet index (r_idx = r_idx’), the ratchet steps (PN(st) = PN(st’)), the
receiving Diffie-Hellman keys (DHr(st) = DHr(st’)) and the root keys (RK(st) = RK(st’)).
A substantial part of our effort was devoted to identifying and formalising the correct invariants over mutable states, and
to understanding how to strengthen the inductive hypotheses necessary for PROVERIF to prove FS and PCS by induction.
This involved both diagnosing why PROVERIF would not terminate or yielded false negatives, and expressing all intermediate
security properties verified in the DR by the various protocol elements. Once these invariants and lemmas were properly
defined however, the remainder of the process was fully automatic: PROVERIF could then complete all proofs without further
manual intervention.
Concretely, our model includes 7 generic lemmas common to both FS and PCS, covering over 30 distinct invariants
over the states, as well as 2 lemmas specific to FS (showing first FS of root and chain keys) and 7 lemmas specific to
PCS (similarly showing PCS of root and chain keys, as well as the compromise properties of Diffie-Hellman and root
keys). Some of these auxiliary lemmas, for instance variants of PCS for root and chain keys, were instrumental in allowing
PROVERIF to establish PCS for message keys.
GSVERIF and counters. Although modelling mutable state via private channels is standard in the applied π-calculus,
PROVERIF has historically struggled to verify protocols that rely on this encoding. To address this, a front-end called
14

GSVERIF was developed in [23] to better handle mutable state. Their methodology is particularly well-suited for states
containing monotonically increasing counters, as in our case with the ratchet index (r_idx), modification index (m_idx),
and receive index (rcv_idx). However, directly using the GSVERIF front-end resulted in non-termination in our setting, due
to its highly generic transformations being applied indiscriminately. Instead, we relied on a PROVERIF library introduced
in [24], which allowed us to apply the methodology of GSVERIF in a more fine-grained and controlled way.
4.3. Extension of our model
Although our primary focus is the Double Ratchet specification, we also consider several variants of the Signal model.
These variants differ according to whether Signed Pre-Keys (SPKs) can be reused, whether header encryption is enabled,
and whether the attacker is allowed to compromise sender Diffie-Hellman keys. Instead of developing a separate model for
each variant, we construct a single parameterised model. An example configuration is:
letfun allow_same_SPK = true.
letfun allow_HE = false.
letfun allow_compromise_DHs = true.
This particular configuration (allowing SPK reuse and all key compromises, including DHs, but disabling header encryption)
corresponds to the Signal implementation under our threat model. We however must analyse multiple variants, as the more
general the model, the more challenging it is for PROVERIF to complete proofs. For example, we encountered out-of-memory
errors when attempting to prove PCS with both header encryption and DH compromise enabled, but could successfully
obtain proofs by disallowing DH key compromise.
Reuse of SPKs. In a session between I and R initiated via PQXDH, the two initial parameters are the shared secret root key
SK and R’s signed pre-key (SPKR). In principle, SK should be unique for each session. However, as shown in Section 3.2.2,
this is not guaranteed on R’s side, which may lead to replay attacks. To simplify the expression of security properties (e.g.
forward secrecy, which only holds after the third ratchet with SK reuse), we assume fresh SK values in our model. Signed
pre-keys, on the other hand, are explicitly medium-term keys and may be reused across sessions. Accordingly, our model
includes a concurrent process genSPKs which generates SPKs for each identity and stores them in a global table SPKs:
(* Generate SPKs for ids *)
let genSPKs =
! in(att,idR:id);
let spk = generate_dh() in
insert SPKs(idR, spk).
When the Signal protocol assigns to R an SPK, if allow_same_SPK is enabled, R retrieves its key from the SPKs table
(which may or may not be fresh); otherwise, a new SPK is generated:
! in(att, (idI:id, idR:id));
let responder_dh_key_pair =
if allow_same_SPK then
(get SPKs(=idR, spk) in spk)
else generate_dh()
in ...
Header Encryption. The Signal documentation provides a specification for encryption of headers. Headers contain the
message number (n), the number of messages in the previous ratchet (pn) and the current ratchet public key (DHr). The
purpose of this encryption is to prevent the attacker from distinguishing messages or inferring their ordering. Achieving
indistinguishability proofs in PROVERIF, while possible, is considerably more difficult and would likely require substantial
modifications to our model. Therefore, within the scope of this paper, we restrict our analysis to proving that header
encryption does not break forward secrecy or post-compromise security. To this end, we deliberately overapproximate the
attacker’s ability to interact with headers. Specifically, the attacker may decide, for each session, whether header encryption
is used. If it is, the attacker can additionally choose the first two header keys and each nonce used for header encryption.
This reflects the fact that the derivation of the initial header keys is not given in the specification, and there are multiple
options of where to source the nonce.
Composition with PQXDH. Our ultimate goal is to obtain a fully automated proof of the entire Signal protocol, including
the initial setup via PQXDH. We reuse a PROVERIF model [4] for standalone PQXDH, which has been analysed for
various security properties and which establishes the (out of band) authentication of the identity keys, a shared root key SK
and an initial DHr key SPK. The out-of-band authentication is modelled via a table mapping identities to public keys. As
this table is inaccessible to the attacker, it suffices to model authenticated key distribution.
15

Proved
DR
DR-HE*
DR-HE
DR-PQXDH*
Sanity
✓(7s/0.3GB) ✓(5m/2.6GB) ✓(5m/2.6GB) ✓(38m/18GB)
Lemmas
✓(1m/0.3GB) ✓(1h/2.2GB)
✓(1h/2.6GB)
✓(4h/10GB)
FS
✓(8s/0.1GB) ✓(2m/0.2GB) ✓(12m/0.5GB) ✓(10m/1.0GB)
PCS
✓(40m/2.7GB) ✓(22h/38GB)
?
✓(7h/46GB)
TABLE 2. Time (in second, minutes or hours) and memory for proofs of variants of the Double Ratchet (DR) protocol in PROVERIF. DR refers to the
version without header encryption (HE) but with SPK reuse and DHs compromise. PQXDH and HE refer to the protocol composed with PQXDH and
with header encryption, respectively. The star ∗indicates a restriction on the scenario considered: for DR-HE*, we disable the compromise of DHs, and
for DR-PQXDH*, there is a single PQXDH session without OPKs, DHs compromise, or PQXDH key compromises.
In practice, I initiates the session asynchronously: when it decides to contact R, I queries the server for the necessary
information and uses it to generate cryptographic material. In standalone PQXDH, I would then send R a message containing
public key material, which it would use to derive the matching key. This message would also carry some encrypted data,
often the first message of the Double Ratchet.
When composing PQXDH with DR, however, we must allow for out-of-order delivery: R’s first received message might
be any message from I’s initial ratchet. Therefore, I must send the initial key material together with every message from
its initial ratchet. This is specified in the Signal documentation, but complicates modular composition of PQXDH and DR,
since R’s setup process may involve advanced DR functions such as Skipped Messages keys.
To address this, we slightly overapproximate the protocol behaviour. When I initiates a session, I derives the initial
cryptographic values and publicly outputs the key bundle while also initialising its ratchet. At this stage, no messages have
yet been sent to R, unlike in the standalone PQXDH model. R, in turn, listens for its first combined PQXDH + DR
message: R first receives the initial key bundle to initialise its ratchet, and then waits for the first DR message to arrive
and decrypts it in the standard DR manner. Importantly, this ‘first’ DR message is not necessarily the first DR message
output by I, as these may be received out of order. Rather, any DR message in the first ratchet could be received here. In
a nutshell, we conceptually split the initial PQXDH + DR packet into its components.
Note that, as discussed in Section 3.2.1, allowing storage of weak states such as this does make the protocol weaker. In
order to mitigate this we could add restrictions, for example disallowing compromise of 0th ratchet states.
5. ProVerif Double Ratchet analysis
For the DR, we proved forward secrecy and post-compromise security. This required proving several additional helping
lemmas. In addition, to strengthen confidence in our model, we conducted a set of sanity checks confirming its executability,
particularly by illustrating that two participants are able to exchange messages successfully. We considered several variants
with different numbers of messages and alternating the sender and receiver roles.
Our main results are shown in Table 2. The server on which these were run had 378GB of RAM, and a 20 core Intel(R)
Xeon(R) CPU E5-2687W v3 @ 3.10GHz, though PROVERIF is single threaded. The proofs are run on a version of the
protocol that does not suffer from the weaknesses outlined in Section 3, in that: the none_ck cannot be used in decryption,
and each session has a distinct SK. We did not explicitly model the fix for the weak state attack, since it only appears when
composing with PQXDH. In this case, due to memory limitations we had additional restrictions on the attacker’s behaviour
that meant that the attack was not possible. We considered several variants of the protocol as discussed in the earlier section
on parametrisation, we discuss the results for the most interesting versions.
The Double Ratchet (DR). For the model which we consider to be accurate to the standalone Double Ratchet as
implemented, all proofs were successful. Most ran quickly, with PCS being the only proof to take significantly longer
than a minute, taking 40 minutes. The memory requirements are also reasonably modest, with the exception of PCS at
2.7GB all are well under 1GB. This gives an automated proof of the Double Ratchet, assuming the freshness and secrecy
of SK.
The Double Ratchet with header encryption (DR-HE* / DR-HE). Header encryption adds little complexity to the protocol
but it does result in a larger state space for the protocol since we now have four additional state variables. As a result we
were unable to prove PCS on the full version (DR-HE) of this, since we ran out of memory. We ran the same proofs with
DHs compromise disabled (denoted DR-HE*) and in this case we were able to prove all results. This still takes significantly
more resources than the basic proof, with post-compromise security requiring about 38 GB and taking just under 22 hours.
It’s possible that this is due to our lemmas not proving enough information about the structure of header keys, and that if
there were more lemmas then these proofs would use less resources.
16

The Double Ratchet composed with PQXDH. Composition with PQXDH adds significant extra information to the cell.
For example, the initial SK now contains three or four Diffie-Hellman calculations, rather than just a fresh value. The
resulting state space increase makes even the simplest lemmas currently impractical. In order to get some guarantees, we
restrict the possible attacks, and the behaviours of a process. We disallowed the use of one-time pre keys, restricted to one
session, and did not allow attacks on either PQXDH or DHs keys. With these restrictions in place, we were able to show
sanity, the state lemmas, forward secrecy, and post-compromise security.
Attack traces and fixes. To ensure the correctness of our model and consequently the validity of our proofs we conducted
a series of sanity check queries. These queries aimed to verify the executability of the model by examining small scenarios
involving only a few message exchanges, allowing us to test the various components of DR. As shown in Table 2, PROVERIF
may still require a significant amount of time to verify these sanity checks. This is partly because the tool is optimized for
proof generation rather than attack discovery, especially in models as large as ours.
In addition, we verified that our model could capture the attacks described in Section 3, or at least some of their core
aspects. For instance, the attack on the specification was mitigated in our model by checking that CKr is different from
None before any decryption attempt. Removing this check enables PROVERIF to rediscover the attack that breaks forward
secrecy. Regarding replay attacks, we did not directly model point-mangling attacks on X25519 or their interactions with
PQXDH. However, focusing solely on the DR specification, we demonstrated using PROVERIF that allowing an SK to be
reused across two distinct sessions compromises forward secrecy.
6. Limitations and future work
Our analysis of the DR specification is rather complete, but we do not provide strong results for the composition of the
DR with either PQXDH or SPQR, nor do we include the analysis of Sesame in our models. Bridging these gaps would
be of strong interest, especially as the main weaknesses we uncovered lie precisely at the intersection of the core three
components. However, as we believe that we have pushed as far as we can with the capabilities of PROVERIF, such future
work might either need new developments on the PROVERIF side, or novel ideas on how to verify and model the composition
of the protocols.
Further, PROVERIF makes several approximations. Notably, it models Diffie-Hellman operation in a very abstract way
and typically does not model that the attacker may compute the inverse of group elements, hence, an analysis of DR using
TAMARIN might be of interest, or a more precise DH model in PROVERIF. Finally, PROVERIF only provides guarantees
against a symbolic attacker where cryptography is idealized, so obtaining computer-aided security proofs with computational
guarantees is also an important goal.
Ethics considerations
Weak State Attack and Replay Attack. For both of these attacks, a report and a small prototype based on the libsignal
implementation illustrating the attacks were transmitted to Signal Messenger’s security team. The weak state attack was
reported at the end of March 2025, and the replay attack in September 2025. For both, a fix was pushed to the main branch
of libsignal in under a week.
To follow up, as WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger both license libsignal, the reports were transmitted to Meta’s
security team. For the weak state attack, a fix was deployed for WhatsApp Web and Android in early September 2025. For
the replay attack, at the time of submission, we did not know whether the issue had been fixed, as we had not received
updates from Meta for some time. During the reporting process, we encountered some difficulties with access to the bug
reporting platform. In particular, the Facebook account created for submission was subsequently deactivated, which limited
our ability to manage the report through the interface. Although we were able to maintain partial communication via email,
this did not fully resolve the situation, and some requested actions required access to the interface we could not use. In the
absence of further updates, and in accordance with the responsible disclosure timeline agreed with Meta until December
2025, we proceeded with the publication of this article.
Null Decryption Key. The null decryption key attack on the DR specification was reported and acknowledged in February
2024. After some delay due to the major SPQR update that was in progress at the time, it was fixed in November 2025 by
updating the specification of the KDF_CK function which must fail on a None input.