EQuADiSE: Efficient Quantum-safe Adaptive Distributed
Symmetric-key Encryption
Sayani Sinha1, Sikhar Patranabis2, and Debdeep Mukhopadhyay1
1IIT Kharagpur India
2IBM Research India
April 23, 2026
Abstract
Distributed symmetric-key encryption (DiSE), introduced in CCS’ 18 enables threshold
versions of traditional (symmetric-key) authenticated encryption. In DiSE, the long-term
master secret key is secret-shared among multiple parties following a threshold access
structure, and both encryption and decryption are performed in a distributed manner. An
adaptively secure DiSE, introduced in INDOCRYPT’ 20 tolerates adaptive corruptions of
the key-holding parties for arbitrary thresholds, while simultaneously retaining efficient
encryption and decryption. Unfortunately, all existing instances of adaptively secure DiSE
are either quantum-broken (due to their inherent-reliance on discrete log-hard groups), or
incur exponential (in the number of parties) online overheads for encryption/decryption.
In this paper, we present EQuADiSE – the first practically efficient, adaptively se-
cure, and plausibly post-quantum construction of DiSE based on the Module Learning
with Rounding (MLWR) assumption in the Quantum Random Oracle model (QROM).
EQuADiSE is the first adaptively secure quantum-safe instance of DiSE that incurs lin-
ear (in the number of parties) encryption/decryption overheads. As a core technical tool
of independent interest, we introduce an MLWR-based distributed pseudorandom func-
tion (DPRF) that enjoys adaptive security in the QROM and practically outperforms all
existing adaptively secure DPRF constructions in terms of online evaluation time.
We present experimental evaluations demonstrating that EQuADiSE achieves higher
online throughput than all prior realizations of DiSE, including quantum-broken realizations
based on discrete log-hard groups.
1

Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
Our Contributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Technical Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Preliminaries
8
2.1
Notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Some Terminologies and Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
(t, T)-Threshold Secret Sharing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.1
Preprocessing.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.2
Sharing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.3
Reconstruction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Distributed PRF (DPRF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Adaptively Secure Module-LWR based Distributed PRF
15
3.1
Recalling LWR-based DPRF of [35] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Construction of Module-LWR based DPRF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Adaptive Security of MLWR-based DPRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.1
Proof of Adaptive Security of LWR-based DPRF [35] . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Adaptive Security of MLWR-based DPRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Choice of Parameters for Adaptive DPRF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
EQuADiSE: An Application
26
4.1
DiSE: An Overview [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Instantiations of DPRF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Experimental Evaluation
28
A Overview of Several Existing DPRFs
34
2

1
Introduction
Threshold cryptography [20] enables protecting long-term secret keys by secret-sharing such
keys among multiple parties. Any attacker corrupting upto a threshold number of these parties
(information-theoretically) fails to recover the secret keys. Threshold cryptography serves as the
foundation for several advanced cryptographic primitives such as threshold fully-homomorphic
encryption [10], secure multiparty computation [5], function secret sharing [13], and functional
encryption [25]. Traditionally, threshold cryptography considers two kinds of corruption models
– static, where the adversary corrupts a fixed subset of the key-holding parties at the beginning
of time, and adaptive, where the adversary adaptively chooses which key-holding parties to
corrupt over time. For many practical applications, security against adaptive corruptions is
more desirable.
Distributed Symmetric-Key Encryption.
The study of threshold authenticated symmetric-
key encryption was introduced in [2]. The authors of [2] introduced a primitive called distributed
symmetric-key encryption (DiSE). In DiSE, the master secret key is secret-shared among multiple
parties following a threshold access structure, and both encryption and decryption are performed
in a distributed manner. DiSE enables protecting long-term keys in many different applications,
such as protecting data at rest, authenticating clients on enterprise networks, and securing data
and payments on IoT devices.
Informally speaking, the DiSE scheme introduced in [2] (followed by several other optimizations
of DiSE [17, 1, 21, 28]) uses the following blueprint.
Consider the classic construction of
symmetric-key encryption (SKE) from a pseudorandom function (PRF) where the encryption of
a message m under a secret key k is given by
Enc(k, m) = (r, Fk(r) ⊕m),
where Fk is a PRF and r is a randomly sampled PRF input. The core idea of [2] is to distribute
the encryption/decryption procedure by replacing the PRF Fk by a distributed PRF (DPRF) [30].
A DPRF allows securely evaluating Fk(·) on any input in a distributed manner, while the secret
key k is secret-shared across multiple parties following a threshold access structure. There
exist known constructions of DPRFs from purely symmetric-key assumptions such as any
PRF [30], as well constructions from number-theoretic assumptions such as the decisional
Diffie-Hellman (DDH) assumption [30] and lattice-based assumptions such as Learning with
Errors (LWE) [24], Learning with Rounding (LWR) [35]. Following the blueprint of [2], these
instantiations of DPRF yields DiSE schemes with varying efficiency properties.
A DiSE scheme is said to be ideally efficient if: (i) the key storage required by each party is linear
in the number of key-holding parties, and (ii) the online evaluation time for encryption/decryption
is linear in the number of key-holding parties. In practice, the second requirement is often more
important, particularly for applications (such as authenticating clients on enterprise networks)
where ensuring fast online turnaround time is crucial.
Adaptive Security.
A DiSE scheme is said to be adaptively secure if it tolerates adaptive
corruptions of the key-holding parties for arbitrary thresholds, while simultaneously retaining
efficient encryption and decryption. Among the known instantiations of DiSE, the one based
on purely symmetric-key realizations of DPRF is adaptively secure, but is asymptotically
inefficient since it incurs both exponential key storage and exponential online overheads for
encryption/decryption. The only efficient yet adaptively secure DiSE scheme is based on an
3

adaptive DPRF from the DDH assumption [29]. While this construction is ideally efficient
and plausibly secure against classical attackers, it is broken by known quantum algorithms for
discrete log [34].
Post-Quantum Landscape for Adaptive DiSE.
In this paper, we are interested in building
practically efficient, adaptively secure, and plausibly post-quantum instances of DiSE. Note
that such a construction follows immediately from a DPRF satisfying the same set of properties
simultaneously. Unfortunately, no existing quantum-safe DPRF simultaneously achieves adaptive
security and the desired notions of efficiency as outlined above. To illustrate this, we summarize
known instances of plausibly post-quantum DPRFs and their properties below.
DPRF from any PRF.
The known construction of DPRF from any PRF [30] is adaptively
secure, but incurs both exponential key storage and exponential online overheads for en-
cryption/decryption. This construction essentially captures the schemes which perform an
MPC (Multi-Party Computation)-based evaluation of any PRF.
DPRF from Threshold FHE.
One can build a DPRF in a generic manner from any PRF and a
threshold FHE scheme, which acts as a universal thresholdizer [10]. Based on known instances of
threshold FHE [10, 16, 27, 18, 12], such a construction incurs exponential key storage, but linear
online overheads for encryption/decryption. Unfortunately, all known threshold FHE schemes
are only statically secure, and hence the resulting DPRF is not adaptively secure. Additionally,
the universal thresholdization approach requires non black-box evaluation of the PRF under
the hood of FHE, which renders the resulting DPRF practically inefficient, and unsuitable for
applications of DiSE.
DPRF from LWE [24].
A concrete construction of adaptively secure DPRF from the LWE
assumption was presented in [24]. This scheme incurs exponential key storage, but linear
overheads for online evaluation. Unfortunately, this scheme requires a super-polynomial modulus-
to-noise ratio, and involves a log-depth (in the size of the input) evaluation circuit (aka
Naor-Reingold [31]) consisting of several matrix multiplications. Hence, this scheme is not
amenable to practically efficient realizations of DiSE.
DPRF from LWR.
Recently, the authors of [35] proposed a practically efficient DPRF construc-
tion based on LWR and a corresponding instantiation of DiSE, called PQDiSE. PQDiSE incurs
exponential key storage, but linear online overheads for encryption/decryption. Unfortunately,
their construction is only proven to be statically secure. While adaptive security may be achieved
by naïvely guessing the corrupted set a priori, this leads to an exponential blow-up in the online
overheads for encryption/decryption, thus compromising on efficiency.
In this paper, we ask the following question:
Can we design a practically efficient, adaptively secure, and plausibly post-quantum instance of
DiSE?
Concretely, we ask if it is possible to design a practically efficient and adaptively secure DPRF
from lattice-based hardness assumptions, with linear online evaluation overheads, while avoiding
the requirement of a super-polynomial modulus-to-noise ratio as in [24].
4

DPRFs
Key Share
Size
Partial
Evalua-
tion
Over-
heads
Total
Evalua-
tion
Over-
heads
Post-
Quantum?
Adap-
tively
Secure?
AES(128)-based
(combinatorial) [2]
O(
 T −1
t−1

)
O(
 T −1
t−1)

O(
 T −1
t−1

)
No
Yes (small
t, T)
DDH-based [29]
O(1)
O(1)
O(t)
No
Yes
ThFHE-based [10]
O(
 T −1
t−1

)
O(1)
O(t)
Yes
No
LWE-based [24]
O(
 T −1
t−1

)
O(λt)
O(λt)
Yes
Yes
LWR-based [35]
O(
 T −1
t−1

)
O(1)
O(t)
Yes
No
MLWR-based
(Ours)
O(
 T −1
t−1

)
O(1)
O(t)
Yes
Yes
Table 1: Asymptotic comparison of DPRFs for λ-bit inputs (λ being the security parameter). Note
that for the adaptively secure LWE-based DPRF from [24], the factor of λ in the overheads for partial
and total evaluation reflects the requirement of O(λ) matrix multiplications for every partial evaluation.
In comparison, our DPRF requires a constant number of polynomial multiplications for each partial
evaluation.
1.1
Our Contributions
We answer the above question in the affirmative. Our contributions are as summarized below.
Adaptive DPRF from Module LWR.
We introduce an adaptively secure DPRF from the
Module Learning with Rounding (MLWR) assumption [14, 8, 22] with polynomial modulus-to-
noise ratio. We prove the adaptive security of our construction in the Quantum Random Oracle
model (QROM). Our construction supports arbitrary threshold access structures and incurs
exponential key storage but linear online evaluation overheads, thus matching the asymptotic
efficiency of the best lattice-based non-adaptive DPRFs. In terms of online evaluation time, our
construction outperforms all existing adaptively secure DPRF constructions.
Table 1 compares our proposed DPRF against existing DPRFs for λ-bit inputs (λ being the
security parameter). Except [24], all prior constructions are either quantum-broken, or lack
adaptive security, or suffer from inefficient online evaluation. In the case of [24], the factor
of λ in the evaluation overheads reflects that each partial evaluation requires O(λ) matrix
multiplications, where the matrix dimensions are similar to the the degree of a polynomial in
our MLWR-based DPRF. In contrast, our MLWR-based DPRF only requires a constant number
of polynomial multiplications for each partial evaluation, and is significantly more efficient in
practice.
EQuADiSE.
Our proposed DPRF yields a realization of DiSE, which we call EQuADiSE
(Efficient and Quantum-safe Adaptive Distributed Symmetric-key Encryption). EQuADiSE is
the first practically efficient, adaptively secure, and plausibly post-quantum instance of DiSE. In
particular, EQuADiSE is the first adaptively post-quantum secure instance of DiSE that incurs
linear (in the number of parties) encryption/decryption overheads.
5

Experimental Validation.
In Section 5, we experimentally evaluate the practical efficiency
of our proposed MLWR-based DPRF and EQuADiSE, and compare these against all of the
DPRFs and the corresponding realizations of DiSE from Table 1. Our results show that our
MLWR-based DPRF is faster than all other DPRFs (including the ones based on AES-128 and
DDH) in terms of online evaluation time, particularly for larger values of (t, T) (where T denotes
the total number of parties and t denotes the threshold). The naïve distributed construction of
AES-based DPRF is essentially equivalent to a generic MPC-based technique of evaluating AES
(which is viewed as a PRF). Thus, our construction is more efficient than a generic MPC-based
solution of DPRF. These efficiency benefits also translate to EQuADiSE, which achieves higher
online throughput than all prior realizations of DiSE, and scales smoothly to larger values of
(t, T). Our implementations of DPRFs and EQuADiSE are available here1.
1.2
Technical Overview
In this section, we present an overview of the techniques underlying our adaptively secure
MLWR-based DPRF.
PRF from LWR.
The starting point for our proposed DPRF is a simple weak PRF F :
Zn
q × Zn
q →Zp for appropriately chosen moduli q and p such that p < q:
F
 k ∈Zn
q , y ∈Zn
q

= ⌊⟨y, k⟩⌉p,
where the operator ⌊·⌉p takes as input an element in Zq, and rounds it to the nearest integer in
Zp (in other words, effectively drops the least significant (log q −log p) bits). The above is, by
definition, a weak PRF under the LWR assumption, for appropriately chosen q, p. Recall that a
weak PRF only satisfies pseudorandomness for uniformly sampled inputs. However, one can turn
the above weak PRF into a full-fledged PRF in a straightforward manner by applying a random
oracle on the input. While our formal treatment in Section 3 considers the full-fledged random
oracle-based PRF, we focus on the weak PRF setting in the overview for ease of exposition.
This setting suffices to provide a flavor of our core techniques.
Non-Adaptive DPRF from LWR [35].
In [35], it was shown that the above PRF can
be extended to a (t, T)-DPRF for arbitrary (reconstruction and privacy) threshold t < T with
security against static corruptions. Their approach was to secret share the key k among T
parties using Linear Integer Secret Sharing (LISS) [19] in the setup phase, such that any subset
of t parties can linearly reconstruct the key. Distributed evaluation of the PRF on an input y is
achieved by a t-sized subset S of parties as follows: first each party Pi ∈S uses its key share ki
to compute zi = ⌊⟨y, k⟩⌉q1, where q1 is an additional intermediate modulus such that p < q1 < q.
Finally, the evaluator obtains the final output as z∗= ⌊f({zi}Pi∈S)⌉p, where f is some linear
function of the partial evaluations {zi} (see Section 3.1 for a more formal exposition).
The authors of [35] proved that the above construction is a (weak) DPRF that satisfies both
consistency and security against static corruptions of up to (t −1) parties for appropriately
chosen q, q1, p = poly(λ) (λ being the security parameter) assuming the hardness of LWR for
polynomial modulus-to-modulus ratio [8]. At a high level, their proof strategy crucially uses the
knowledge of the corrupt set of parties and the corresponding key shares (in the case of static
corruptions, this is known at setup) to construct a simulator that simulates an honest party’s
partial evaluation on any uniformly random input.
1https://github.com/SayaniSinha97/EQuADiSE
6

Adaptive Security of Above DPRF in ROM.
Our first contribution is in proving that
the above DPRF is, in fact, secure against adaptive corruptions of up to (t −1) parties for
appropriately chosen q, q1, p = poly(λ), while relying on the same assumption of the hardness of
LWR for polynomial modulus-to-modulus ratio. Note that, in the case of adaptive corruptions,
the set of corrupt parties is not known from beforehand, and hence, one cannot follow the
simulation strategy from [35] of using the knowledge of the corrupt parties’ secret shares to
simulate the honest party’s partial evaluations. In particular, consider a scenario where the
adversary adaptively corrupts an honest party Pi and learns its secret share. In this case, all
simulated partial evaluations corresponding to Pi with respect to prior queries must be consistent
with the revealed secret share once the adversary corrupts Pi. It is not immediately clear how to
do this since the simulator does not learn Pi’s key share until the adversary chooses to corrupt
it.
To address this, we present an alternative proof strategy that relies on the programmability of
the random oracle. At a high level, we show that the simulator is able to perfectly simulate all
the responses to the adversary’s queries without knowing any of the actual key shares. This
effectively implies that no meaningful information about the underlying secret shares is leaked to
the adversary through the query-response phase in the real world. To achieve this, the simulator
samples one uniform random matrix A over Zn×m
q
, and another uniform random matrix R over
Zn×n
q
. Let H(·) be a random oracle that is expected to return a uniformly random y over Zn
q
for any query input x.
• For each new query input x, the random oracle response H(x) is simulated with (R · A) · s for
a newly sampled s
$←−{0, 1}m. The value H(x) = (R · A) · s represents a random subset-sum
of m columns of (R · A), and due to the leftover hash lemma [32], H(x) is uniformly random
over Zn
q for sufficiently large m.
• The response to the partial evaluation query for input x with respect to an uncompromised
share kj is simulated without using the knowledge of kj at all. Basically, a uniform random
k′
j
$←−Zn
q is sampled and the simulated response is ⌊⟨A · s, k′
j⟩⌉q1. The value s corresponds to
the input x, as specified during a random oracle query for input x. Since A · s is uniformly
random over Zn
q due to the leftover hash lemma [32] and so is k′
j, the distribution of the
simulated partial evaluations exactly matches with that of the real ones.
• At a later point in the game, when it is time to reveal the share kj to the adversary, (i.e., the
adversary compromises kj), the simulator cheats the adversary by revealing k′′
j instead of kj.
Here, k′′
j is computed as R−1 · k′
j. It is important to note that,
⌊⟨H(x), k′′
j ⟩⌉q1 = ⌊⟨A · s, k′
j⟩⌉q1,
which implies that the simulated response to the corruption query (k′′
j ) remains consistent
with the previous responses to partial evaluation queries corresponding to kj, from the point
of view of the adversary.
Clearly, for a feasible computation of k′′
j , R must be invertible modulo q. This can be taken
care of during the setup of the random oracle while sampling a suitable R.
We discuss the detailed proof of adaptive security in Section 3.3 involving additional techniques.
Security in the Quantum Random Oracle Model.
In practice, a random oracle is
instantiated by a fixed function, typically a cryptographic hash function. Hence, quantum-safe
7

analyses in the random oracle model should take into consideration adversaries with quantum
oracle access [9]. However, the LWR-based DPRF in [35] proves security only against adversaries
with classical access. This notion is weaker, since quantum adversaries can query the oracle in
superposition, thereby accessing exponentially many inputs per query and potentially extracting
more information than any polynomial number of classical queries allows. We show that our
proof of adaptive security for the DPRF construction of [35] holds even in the quantum random
oracle model (QROM), while facilitating the adversary with negligible amount of additional
distinguishing advantage.
Adaptation to Module LWR.
We present a more practically efficient variant of the above-
discussed DPRF by switching from the LWR assumption over integer lattices to the Module
LWR (MLWR) assumption over module lattices. We note that several NIST standards, notably
ML-KEM1 and ML-DSA2) rely on Module LWE/LWR for better efficiency as compared to their
LWE/LWR-based counterparts, and we are not aware of any attacks that perform substantially
better against these assumptions as compared to LWE/LWR.
Our starting point is the natural adaptation of the LWR-based weak PRF outlined above to the
setting of MLWR:
F(K ∈Rd
q, X ∈Rd
q) = ⌊X · K⌉p ∈Rp
where Rq and Rp are appropriately chosen polynomial rings, p is an appropriate rounding
modulus, and d is the module rank. We then apply the same two-step rounding technique to
extend this weak PRF into a weak DPRF. To establish the adaptive security of the MLWR-based
DPRF, we adapt our techniques for proving the adaptive security of the LWR-based DPRF
with only one key modification, namely, the use of the regularity lemma from [26] instead of the
leftover hash lemma [32] to accommodate the module lattice framework. We refer to Section 3.3
for the detailed construction and adaptive proof of security.
2
Preliminaries
2.1
Notations
The notation x ←X signifies that x is sampled from the distribution X, whereas x
$←−X means
that, x is sampled uniformly at random from the set X. For q, N ∈N, RN,q = Zq[x]/(xN + 1)
represents a ring of polynomials with coefficients in Zq and degree at most (N −1). Bold upper
case (e.g., A) variable denotes either a vector of polynomials over RN,q or a matrix in Zq,
depending upon the context. With two vectors a, b ∈Zn
q , ⟨a, b⟩= Pn
i=1 aibi (mod q) represents
their vector dot product modulo q. With two polynomials A, B ∈RN,q, (A · B) ∈RN,q denotes
polynomial multiplication modulo (xN + 1). Provided two vectors of polynomials A, B ∈Rd
N,q,
A · B denotes Pd
i=1 AiBi (mod (xN + 1)) ∈RN,q. The cardinality of a set S is denoted by
|S|. The notation [n] for some n ∈N denotes the set {1, . . . , n}. For any y ∈Zq, the round-off
operation, denoted by ⌊y⌉p gives the nearest integral value of (y · p
q ) in Zp; in particular, if (y · p
q )
has a fractional part exactly equal to 0.5, we choose to always round it down to ⌊y · p
q ⌋to avoid
ambiguity. We can apply the round-off operator to vectors, matrices and polynomials as well to
denote element-wise/coefficient-wise round-off operation. For security parameter λ, negl(λ) and
poly(λ) denote a negligible function and a polynomial function of λ respectively.
1https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.203.pdf
2https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.204.pdf
8

2.2
Some Terminologies and Definitions
Threshold Access Structure. Let P = {P1, . . . , PT } be a set of T parties, and suppose that
some secret k is distributed among them in form of secret shares. Access structure is a set
consisting of all “valid” subsets P ⊆P of parties that can recover the secret k by combining
their key shares together. For any t, T ∈N (t ≤T), a minimal (t, T)-threshold access structure
over P is defined as a collection of valid subsets of the form At,T = {P ⊆P :
P
 = t}, such
that we have |At,T | =
 T
t

as the number of valid subsets.
Monotone Boolean Formula (MBF). A Boolean formula is monotone if it has a single
output and it consists of only AND and OR combination of Boolean variables. Note that any
(t, T)-threshold access structure At,T can be represented by a MBF. The fact that a particular
collaboration of t parties is able to reconstruct the secret, is captured by Boolean formula of the
form (x1 ∧. . . ∧xt) and that any such t-collaboration is a way of reconstruction, is captured by
ORing
 T
t

such terms. For e.g., A3,4 is represented by (x1 ∧x2 ∧x3) ∨(x1 ∧x2 ∧x4) ∨(x1 ∧
x3 ∧x4) ∨(x2 ∧x3 ∧x4).
Pseudo Random Function (PRF). We recall the formal definition of a pseudorandom
function (PRF). Let F : K × X →Y be a family of pseudo random functions and F′ = {f ′|f ′ :
X →Y} be the set of all possible functions with the same domain and range. Let us assume
that, fk ∈F uses a uniform random secret k
$←−K and, on input x ∈X, outputs fk(x), using
both k and x. Then, the advantage of any PPT (Probabilistic Polynomial Time) distinguisher
D is negligible, i.e.,
Pr[Dfk(·)(1λ) = 1] −Pr[Df ′(·)(1λ) = 1]
 < negl(λ),
where λ is a security parameter. The first probability is taken over uniform choice of k and
randomness of D, and the second probability is taken over uniform choice of f ′ and randomness
of D.
Learning with Rounding (LWR) problem. LWR problem, first introduced in [6], is a
“derandomized" version of Learning with Errors (LWE) problem [32]. Given a parameter n ∈N,
two moduli q, p ∈N such that q > p ≥2, the LWR distribution Ls for a secret s ∈Zn
q is defined
over Zn
q × Zp of the form (a, b), where we choose a
$←−Zn
q and then calculate b = ⌊⟨a, s⟩⌉p.
The decision LWR problem is to efficiently distinguish samples of Ls from uniformly random
sample of Zn
q × Zp, and it is assumed to be hard for proper choice of n, q and p.
Module Learning with Rounding (MLWR) problem. This is a variant of LWR problem
defined on module lattice, which is a structured lattice, however having lesser structure than
an ideal lattice. Module lattice essentially bridges the gap between unstructured lattice and
ideal lattice, while preserving the quality of both: hardness of problems defined on unstructured
lattice and efficient parameter choices of hard problems defined on ideal lattice. LWR problem
when defined on ideal lattice, is called ring-LWR problem and when defined on module lattice,
is called module-LWR problem, just similar to its well-studied LWE (Learning with Errors)
counterpart. Concept of module LWE was first introduced in [14] and its relation to worst-case
hard problems defined on module lattice was formally analyzed in [23]. Several NIST candidates
for post-quantum secure cryptosystems [22] rely on the hardness of the MLWR problem. The
assumption is as follows.
Let K ∈Rd
q be the fixed MLWR secret. Then an MLWR sample with secret K is of the form
(A, B), where A
$←−Rd
q and B = ⌊A·K⌉p. Here, A·K denotes Pd
i=1 Ai ·Ki such that Ai ·Ki is
9

the polynomial multiplication modulo (xN + 1). The MLWR assumption is that distinguishing
MLWR sample from a truly random sample of Rd
q × Rp efficiently is hard for a PPT adversary
with proper choice of parameters.
2.3
(t, T)-Threshold Secret Sharing
A threshold secret sharing scheme is an essential underlying primitive to build a distributed
PRF protocol. A (t, T)-threshold secret sharing scheme shares a key k among these T parties in
such a way that any t or more parties are able to reconstruct it from their respective shares,
though collaboration of less than t parties does not suffice. We choose to use Benaloh-Leichter
Linear Integer Secret Sharing Scheme (LISSS) as described in [19]. The secret sharing scheme
is “linear integer” because key shares can be linearly combined to get the actual secret back
in a way that the coefficients of the linear combination are integers. These coefficients used
during the reconstruction of the secret are called recovery coefficients. Though the original
Benaloh-Leichter LISSS shares a scalar secret, it can naturally be extended to share a secret in
vector form. As we deal with secrets belonging to Zn
q in later sections, we describe the LISSS
scheme in the context of sharing a secret vector k ∈Zn
q here.
2.3.1
Preprocessing.
Here, we discuss some necessary preprocessing steps for threshold secret sharing.
Formation of distribution matrix M: Formation of distribution matrix M depends upon
the MBF, representing a (t, T)-threshold access structure. As any MBF is a combination of
AND and OR of Boolean variables, we need to focus on the three following cases.
Each Boolean variable xi corresponds to a singleton matrix with 1 as its only element.
AND-ing of Mfa and Mfb: Let Mfa with dimension da × ea and Mfb with dimension db × eb
be the distribution matrices for Boolean formulae fa and fb respectively. Then we form Mfa∧fb
as follows:
ca
ca
Ca
0
0
cb
0
Cb
Here, ca and cb denote the first column of Mfa and Mfb respectively. Ca and Cb denote the
rest of the columns of Mfa and Mfb respectively. Mfa∧fb has dimension (da + db) × (ea + eb).
OR-ing of Mfa and Mfb: Let Mfa with dimension da × ea and Mfb with dimension db × eb be
the distribution matrices for Boolean formulae fa and fb respectively. Then we form Mfa∨fb as
follows:
ca
Ca
0
cb
0
Cb
Here, ca and cb denote the first column of Mfa and Mfb respectively. Ca and Cb denote the rest
of the columns of Mfa and Mfb respectively. Mfa∨fb has dimension (da + db) × (ea + eb −1).
It can be easily verified that, the distribution matrix M for (t, T)-threshold secret sharing has
dimension d × e, where d =
 T
t

t and e = (1 +
 T
t

(t −1)).
Formation of share matrix ρ: ρ is a matrix with dimension e × n. Its first row is populated
from the n elements of the actual secret vector k ∈Zn
q . The rest of the elements of the matrix
are filled uniformly randomly from Zq.
10

2.3.2
Sharing.
First we compute the matrix M · ρ that has d =
 T
t

t rows. Each of the rows is a unique key
share. Note that the number of t-sized subset of P is
 T
t

and each of the t parties in a t-sized
subset will hold a keyshare corresponding to that specific group, which justifies d =
 T
t

t to be
the total number of unique keyshares. For ease of explanation, we identify each keyshare with
the following two attributes: (1) party_id (which party the key share belongs to), (2) group_id
(which t-sized group the key share is used for). By enumerating over all t-sized subsets and
tagging them with corresponding enumerating serial numbers, we get group_id’s of all t-sized
subsets.
Now sharing of d rows among T parties happens in the following manner: we consider d =
 T
t

t
rows as
 T
t

chunks of rows of size t. Now for i ∈[
 T
t

], we pick ith such chunk at a time and
assign each of the t rows to parties belonging to the subset with group_id i. For example, in a
(3, 5)-threshold secret sharing, subset {P1, P2, P3} has group_id 1, so first three rows of Mρ are
assigned to P1, P2, P3 respectively. {P1, P2, P4} has group_id 2, so next three rows of M · ρ are
assigned to P1, P2, P4 respectively and so on.
2.3.3
Reconstruction.
Any t-sized group of parties, with their key shares, should be able to reconstruct k. Given
P′ = {Pi1, Pi2, . . . , Pit} ⊂P with i1 < · · · < it, each of the t parties will have one key share
with group_id corresponding to P′. Let us denote these t key shares as {ki1, . . . , kit}. Without
loss of generality, in any t-sized group, the party with minimum value of party_id is called the
group_leader. Hence, Pi1 is the group_leader here. In this LISSS the recovery coefficient is 1 for
the group_leader and -1 for the rest of the (t −1) parties. The key k can be reconstructed as
k = ki1 −Pt
j=2 kij. We exploit this reconstruction property in final evaluation of (t, T)-threshold
PRF.
A Toy Example.
We summarize the precise output of the above-mentioned threshold secret
sharing scheme with the help of a toy example here. We consider modulus q = 8 and dimension
n = 3.
Let the secret be k = [2, 1, 6] and we apply (3, 4)-threshold secret sharing on k
to distribute it among parties {P1, P2, P3, P4}. We deal with the straight-forward MBF for
(3, 4)-threshold, which is, f = x1x2x3 + x1x2x4 + x1x3x4 + x2x3x4. After performing the
above-mentioned preprocessing and sharing procedure, the matrix M · ρ will have
 4
3

· 3 = 12
rows and n = 3 columns. Each row of M · ρ is a secret share and is an element of Z3
8. If the
ith literal in the MBF is xj, then party Pj gets the ith row of the matrix as a secret share.
Effectively, each of the four 3-sized subsets have a (3, 3)-linear integer secret sharing within it.
A hypothetical value of matrix M · ρ is the following:


0
4
1
2
1
4
4
2
7
2
1
3
3
2
3
5
6
2
5
2
3
2
6
0
1
3
5


11

Let us pick one 3-sized subset {P1, P2, P4} whose group_id is 2. Following the rule of sharing,
P1, P2, P4 get 4th,5th and 6th row of M · ρ, and we denote them with k2,1, k2,2 and k2,4
respectively. The two subscripts of each share denote the group_id and party_id respectively.
P1 is the group_leader of the group {P1, P2, P4}. The secret k is reconstructed as,
k = k2,1 −k2,2 −k2,4 = ([2, 1, 3] −[3, 2, 3] −[5, 6, 2])
mod 8 = [2, 1, 6].
In short, P1 has to store k1,1, k2,1, k3,1 corresponding to subsets {P1, P2, P3}, {P1, P2, P4},
{P1, P3, P4} respectively, P2 has to store k1,2, k2,2, k4,2 corresponding to subsets {P1, P2, P3},
{P1, P2, P4}, {P2, P3, P4} respectively, and so on.
Size of Secret Shares.
After applying (t, T)-threshold secret sharing on k ∈Zn
q , each party gets
 T −1
t−1

key shares to store. So each party has to store
 T −1
t−1

· n · ⌈log2 q⌉bits in total.
Choice of LISS over Shamir’s secret sharing.
We use LISS for sharing the PRF secret instead
of the well known Shamir’s secret sharing [33], since reconstruction of the secret requires only
{−1, 1}-integer linear combination of the shares in the former case while in the latter case,
much larger Lagrange coefficients serve as the recovery coefficients. Hence, the rounding error
from each party gets multiplied by the Lagrange coefficients and it would require even larger
(practically inefficient) q1
p ratio in order to eliminate the errors in the final rounding phase.
2.4
Distributed PRF (DPRF)
Distributed PRF supports distributed evaluation of the PRF by multiple parties. The PRF
secret k always remain distributed in form of secret shares among multiple parties. Following is
a formal definition of distributed PRF.
Definition 1 (Distributed Pseudo Random Function (DPRF)). Let P = {Pj : j ∈[T]} be a set
of T parties. A (t, T)-distributed PRF DPRF with input space X, key space K, and output space
Y consists of three PPT algorithms as described below.
DPRF = (DPRF.Setup, DPRF.PartialEval, DPRF.FinalEval).
DPRF.Setup(1λ, At,T ): On input the security parameter λ and threshold access structure At,T ,
total number of parties T, and threshold number of parties t, this algorithm generates a key
k
$←−K, and then shares it among T parties using some t-out-of-T threshold secret sharing
scheme. At the end of the secret sharing process, the actual key k is not stored anywhere. Each
party has to store one or more than one key share(s) depending on the particular threshold secret
sharing scheme used.
DPRF.PartialEval(x, Pj, P′): On input a valid subset P′ ⊂P with |P′| = t, an input x ∈X and
a party Pj ∈P′, the appropriate key share (say, kj) of Pj corresponding to P′ is chosen and a
partial evaluation fkj(x) is returned. Note that, if |P′| ≥t, we consider any t parties among
them to get a minimal valid subset and proceed in the same manner.
DPRF.FinalEval(P′, {fkj(x)}Pj∈P′): On input a valid subset P′ ⊂P with |P′| = t, and all the
partial evaluations by parties Pj ∈P′, this algorithm combines them to get the final PRF
evaluation. The actual combination procedure depends upon the reconstruction property of the
underlying threshold secret sharing scheme.
12

Correctness and Consistency of Distributed PRF. A (t, T)-distributed PRF with fk(·)
as its underlying PRF is correct if given an input, its distributed evaluation by any valid subset
P′ ⊂P outputs the same value as would be obtained by directly evaluating fk(·) on the same
input except with a negligible probability, i.e.,
Pr[DPRF.FinalEval(P′, {DPRF.PartialEval(x, Pj, P′)}Pj∈P′) = fk(x)] ≥1 −negl(λ).
A (t, T)-distributed PRF is consistent if distributed evaluation on a given input by any two
distinct valid subsets S1, S2 ⊂P with |S1| = |S2| = t outputs the same value except with a
negligible probability, i.e.,
Pr[DPRF.FinalEval(S1, {DPRF.PartialEval(x, Pj, S1)}Pj∈S1)
̸= DPRF.FinalEval(S2, {DPRF.PartialEval(x, Pj′, S2)}Pj′∈S2)]
 ≤negl(λ).
Note that the correctness of (t, T)-distributed PRF implies its consistency, but not the other
way around.
Static Security of Distributed PRF. Following is the notion of static security of DPRF
from [30].
The adversarial model. We assume a PPT adversary that can statically corrupt (i.e., announces
the set of corrupt parties before the partial evaluation query phase starts) at most (t−1) number
of parties and each party if corrupted, is honest but curious; i.e., no corrupted party violates
the protocol of the construction but tries to gather information about unknown secret share in
all possible probabilistic ways within polynomial time.
The security notion. Let P = {Pj : j ∈[T]} be the set of T parties and A be a PPT adversary
as described above. Let bP be a statically corrupted set such that, | bP| = (t −1). Hence, after
DPRF.Setup(1λ, t, T) is run, A has access to key shares of each Pj ∈bP. We say that DPRF is
secure if the winning probability of A against a challenger C in the following game is negligible.
Game
Partial Evaluation Query: A sends a query input x ∈X to C. In response, C sends to A
(fk(x), {fkj(x)}Pj∈P\ b
P), where fkj(x) = DPRF.PartialEval(x, Pj, bP S Pj).
Challenge Phase: A sends a new challenge query x⋆(different from query phase inputs) to C.
Now, C chooses a random bit b
$←−{0, 1}. If b = 0, it sends fk(x⋆) to A, otherwise, it sends some
y
$←−Y to A.
The adversary can raise a polynomial (in security parameter λ) number of partial evaluation
queries before the challenge phase. After A sees the output corresponding to challenge input
x⋆, it outputs a distinguishing bit b′. A wins the game, if b = b′. The (t, T)-DPRF is statically
secure, if Pr[b = b′] ≤negl(λ).
Adaptive Security of Distributed PRF. Now, we describe the notion of adaptive security
of distributed PRF in the form of a game between a challenger Ch and an adversary Ad.
Adversarial model. In case of a (t, T)-distributed DPRF with any t < T, we consider a semi-
honest PPT adversary which can adaptively corrupt at most (t −1) number of parties among a
total of T parties

[…middle truncated for length…]

 x⋆, Ch computes the real DPRF evaluation on
x⋆as f dist
{kj,r}Pj ∈P′ (x⋆) for all r ∈[2, rep] and checks if all of them are equal. If they are equal, this
value is referred to as v (used in answering partial evaluation query on x⋆in case of maximum
corruption), and returned to Ad. Note that Ch’s answer to Ad is necessarily the same as in
earlier hybrids.
Lemma 3. Ad can distinguish Hybrid3,1 from Hybrid2 with advantage ϵ2,3.1 for some ϵ2,3.1 =
negl(λ).
Proof. We prove the phase-wise indistinguishability between Hybrid3,1 and Hybrid2 in the view
of Ad.
• Partial evaluation query. For r ∈[2, rep], the responses are identical to Hybrid2. So, the
focus is on indistinguishability of hybrids in case of r = 1. We discuss three different
scenarios in the following:
– Non-challenge input: Since the responses are of the form ⌊⟨A·si, k′
j,1⟩⌉q1, where A·si
is statistically indistinguishable from uniform random over Zn
q due to leftover hash
lemma and k′
j,1 is sampled uniformly at random from Zn
q , they belong to the same
distribution as of real partial evaluations which are of the form ⌊⟨H(xi), kj,1⟩⌉q1 =
⌊⟨R · A · si, kj,1⟩⌉q1 in Hybrid2.
– Challenge input (when corruption threshold is not reached): Here the responses
are of the form ⌊⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,1⟩⌉q1. Since A · s⋆is statistically indistinguishable from
uniform random over Zn
q due to leftover hash lemma and k′′
j,1 = R−1 · k′
j,1 is uniform
random over Zn
q due to uniform randomness of both R and k′
j,1, the simulated partial
evaluation essentially comes from the same distribution as of real partial distribution
which is of the form ⌊⟨H(x⋆), kj,1⟩⌉q1 = ⌊⟨A · s⋆, kj,1⟩⌉q1 for uniform random kj,1.
– Challenge input (when corruption threshold is reached): The simulated partial
evaluation of the form ⌊v · q
q1 −P
(P′,Pj)∈L⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,1⟩⌉q1 is indistinguishable from
real partial evaluations ⌊⟨H(x⋆), kj,1⟩⌉q1 by Lemma 1 of [35].
• Corruption query: For r ∈[2, rep], the responses to corruption queries are identical to
that in Hybrid2. For r = 1, the responses are simulated without using real shares as
k′′
j,1 = R−1 · k′
j,1, where both R and k′
j,1 are uniform random over Zn
q . Thus, they are
uniform random over Zn
q , just similar to that of the real shares kj,1 in Hybrid2.
• Challenge phase: In Hybrid2, Ch computes the DPRF evaluation using real shares of some
t-sized subset P′ for each of rep different sets of shares, and responds with the result only
21

if it is same in all rep cases. In Hybrid3,1, Ch computes the DPRF evaluation using real
shares of some t-sized subset P′ for (rep −1) different sets of shares with r ̸= 1, and then
behaves identically. It is implied that for r = 1, we assume the DPRF evaluation to be
same with the real DPRF evaluations, since we simulate the tth partial evaluation on x⋆
using this value (v), in case of maximal corruption. Thus, Ch’s response to challenge query
is identical in both the hybrids.
Together, we conclude that Hybrid3,1 is statistically indistinguishable from Hybrid2, and hence
Ad has negligible distinguishing advantage, denoted by ϵ2,3.1, while transitioning from Hybrid2
to Hybrid3,1.
Next, we have a chain of hybrids represented as Hybrid3,r for r ∈[2, rep]. Broadly, Hybrid3,r+1
differs from Hybrid3,r for all r ∈[1, rep −1] in the following sense:
• Partial evaluation query. For each query of the form (xi, Pj, P′), Ch provides Ad with rep
partial evaluations in both the hybrids, each corresponding to one of rep different sets
of shares. In both the hybrids, the first r evaluations are simulated without using real
shares, and the last (rep −r −1) evaluations are computed using real shares. Thus, the
two hybrids differ only in how Ch responds for (r + 1)th evaluation. In Hybrid3,r it is real,
whereas in Hybrid3,r+1 it is simulated using the same method as described in Hybrid3,1.
• Corruption query. Analogously, in Hybrid3,r, Ch sends real share kj,r+1 corresponding to
(r + 1)th set of shares whereas in Hybrid3,r+1, Ch responds with simulated share k′′
j,r+1.
• Challenge phase. The DPRF evaluation on challenge input x⋆is decided based on (rep −r)
real evaluations in Hybrid3,r, whereas in Hybrid3,r+1 it is based on (rep −r −1) real
evaluations.
Now, we describe Hybrid3,rep in the following, where Ch does not make use of any of the real
shares while responding to Ad’s queries in all the phases, including the challenge phase. This
hybrid can be thought of lying completely in the simulated world.
Hybrid3,rep. Here, the random oracle is programmed in exactly the same manner as in Hybrid2
(and remain unchanged through Hybrid3,r for all r ∈[rep]). We describe all other interactions in
the following.
• Partial evaluation query. Ch responds to a partial evaluation query of the form (xi, Pj, P′)
as,

⌊⟨A · si, k′
j,1⟩⌉q1, · · · , ⌊⟨A · si, k′
j,r⟩⌉q1, · · · , ⌊⟨A · si, k′
j,rep⟩⌉q1

∈Zrep
q1 ,
such that each k′
j,r
$←−Zn
q . In case of challenge input x⋆, if the corruption threshold is not
reached by Ad, the response is,

⌊⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,1⟩⌉q1, · · · , ⌊⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,r⟩⌉q1, · · · , ⌊⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,rep⟩⌉q1

∈Zrep
q1 ,
such that k′′
j,r = R−1 · k′
j,r holds for already sampled k′
j,r. However, when the maximal
corruption threshold is reached for some subset P′, the tth honest partial evaluation on x⋆
is simulated as µsim,r = ⌊vsim · q
q1 −P
(P′,Pj)∈L⟨A · s⋆, k′′
j,r⟩⌉q1, where vsim is the response
of Ch in the challenge phase. Thus, the response becomes,

µsim,1, · · · , µsim,r, · · · , µsim,rep

∈Zrep
q1 .
22

• Corruption query. In response to any corruption query of the form (P′, Pj), Ch returns
all rep simulated shares, i.e.,

k′′
j,1, · · · , k′′
j,r, · · · , k′′
j,rep

∈Zn×rep
q
.
• Challenge phase. Ch samples vsim
$←−Zp and sends it as response to challenge query x⋆.
Lemma 4. Ad distinguishes Hybrid3,rep from Hybrid2 with advantage (rep −1) · ϵ2,3.1 + ϵ′, where
ϵ′ = negl(λ).
Proof. Since the transition from Hybrid3,r to Hybrid3,r+1 for all r ∈[rep −1] is exactly similar
to the transition from Hybrid2 to Hybrid3,1, and each transition introduces a distinguishing
advantage of ϵ2,3.1 for Ad, it gives a total distinguishing advantage of (rep −1) · ϵ2,3.1 between
Hybrid2 and Hybrid3,rep−1 for Ad.
The transition from Hybrid3,rep−1 to Hybrid3,rep is similar to that of the transition between any
Hybrid3,r and Hybrid3,r+1, for r ∈[rep −1] with respect to the partial evaluation query phase and
the corruption query phase. However, in challenge phase the transition is different. Ch replaces
the real DPRF evaluation with a uniform random value in Zp. Note that by the correctness
of DPRF, the real DVRF evaluation in Hybrid3,rep−1 is equal to that of base PRF evaluation
which is f base
k
(H(x⋆)) = ⌊⟨H(x⋆), k⟩⌉p, with k being the master secret key. And by the LWR
assumption, this value is computationally indistinguishable from a uniform random value vsim
in Hybrid3,rep. We assume Ad’s distinguishing advantage to be ϵ′ for some ϵ′ = negl(λ) while
transitioning from Hybrid3,rep−1 to Hybrid3,rep.
Together, we conclude that Ad can distinguish between Hybrid2 and Hybrid3,rep with advantage
(rep −1) · ϵ2,3.1 + ϵ′.
Next, we have (rep −1) hybrids represented as Hybrid4,r in decreasing order of r for r ∈[rep −1].
Each Hybrid4,r is identical to Hybrid3,r for all r ∈[rep−1], except in challenge phase. In Hybrid3,r,
Ch responds with real DPRF evaluation whereas in Hybrid4,r, Ch responds with a uniform random
value in Zp. The indistinguishability while transitioning from Hybrid4,r+1 to Hybrid4,r can be
argued in the similar manner as we do in case of transitioning from Hybrid3,r to Hybrid3,r+1. The
responses to partial evaluation queries and corruption queries are transitioned from simulated
to real for one of the rep sets of shares, one at a time for each hybrid transition.
To summarize, Ad can distinguish Hybrid4,1 from Hybrid3,rep with advantage (rep −1) · ϵ2,3.1.
Next, for the sake of completeness, we have three more hybrids Hybrid5, Hybrid6, Hybrid7,
which are identical to Hybrid2, Hybrid1 and Hybrid0, respectively, except the fact that in the
challenge phase, Ch responds with uniform random values in Zp in the former cases and with
real DPRF evaluations in the later.
Note that the interactions between Ch and Ad in the final hybrid Hybrid7 lie in the real world,
but the response in the challenge phase is a uniform random value. Ad’s views in the first and
last hybrid (i.e., Hybrid0 and Hybrid7) emulate the notion of pseudorandomness of a DPRF
under adaptive corruption, as given in Section 2.4. Since for a specific choice of parameters,
rep = O(1) is a constant, Ad can distinguish Hybrid7 from Hybrid0 with advantage,
1
Q + 1

2ϵ0,1 + 2ϵ1,2 + (2 · rep −1) · ϵ2,3.1 + ϵ′
= negl(λ).
The multiplicative factor of
1
Q+1 is there because Ch’s guess of the challenge input x⋆is correct
with probability
1
Q+1. Thus, we conclude that the LWR-based distributed PRF in [35] is
adaptively secure in the random oracle model (ROM).
23

Next, we argue the adaptive security of LWR-based DPRF of [35] in QROM.
Theorem 4. The construction of LWR-based distributed PRF in [35] is adaptively secure in
quantum random oracle model (QROM).
Proof. Though the adaptive proof of security of LWR-based DPRF in [35] in ROM can not
immediately be imported to QROM settings, where Ad can query the random oracle (RO) in
superposition, we prove that with slight modification in the proof it is possible to argue adaptive
security of the DPRF even in QROM.
Before proceeding further, we emphasize that the concept of lazy sampling in ROM does not
work in QROM. This is because Ad can query RO in superposition of exponential number of
inputs with varying amplitudes. So, the RO (i.e., the function H(·)) must be (conceptually)
initialized with the complete input-output behavior in the beginning of the game. Note that
only this conceptual shift suffices to prove the static security of LWR-based DPRF in QROM
in [35]1.
However that is not the case for the proof of adaptive security, because the proof heavily relies
on the programmability of the RO. Again, unlike classical ROM, programming the RO output
at the unqueried inputs is not applicable in QROM, because there is no concept of “unqueried
input” in QROM due to superpositioned queries, and hence this manipulation can be detected by
Ad. Note that though there are a total of (2 · rep + 5) hybrids in the proof of adaptive security in
ROM, the RO description is modified only during transition from Hybrid0 to Hybrid1, Hybrid1 to
Hybrid2 (and analogously during transition from Hybrid5 to Hybrid6, Hybrid6 to Hybrid7). Since
RO’s response remains identical throughout all the other hybrids, Ad does not have any extra
advantage to distinguish between them by exploiting its quantum access to RO. So, we focus on
two following transitions:
• Hybrid0 →Hybrid1: Since, (R · A) · si is statistically close to H(xi), these two hybrids are
indistinguishable in the view of a quantum polynomial time (QPT) adversary.
• Hybrid1 →Hybrid2: Considering that the RO is initialized in the beginning of the game
in both hybrids, note that the RO in these two hybrids differ only at a single input,
namely x⋆. Distinguishing between these two instantiations of RO is equivalent to the
problem of searching the differing input position (which is x⋆) using polynomial number
of superpositioned RO queries. Ad does not know x⋆at the time of RO initialization;
because Ch guesses the challenge input beforehand and aborts the game later if the guess
is wrong. Then by [7], a QPT adversary has a distinguishing advantage of O( Q′2
qn ), where
Q′ = poly(λ) is the total number of RO queries.
Thus, we conclude that LWR-based DPRF in [35] is adaptively secure in QROM.
3.3.2
Adaptive Security of MLWR-based DPRF
The following theorem formalises the adaptive security of our proposed MLWR-based DPRF.
Theorem 5. Construction 2 is adaptively secure in the quantum random oracle model if MLWR
assumption holds.
1In particular, in the proof of static security of [35] no RO programming is involved and hence the RO’s
response to Ad’s queries remain necessarily same throughout all the four hybrids, thus providing no extra
advantage to Ad in distinguishing between those hybrids, even with quantum access to the RO.
24

Proof. The proof approach closely follows the adaptive security proof, previously outlined for
the LWR-based DPRF, except with a few differences.
An alternative of leftover hash lemma in module settings: We use the leftover hash
lemma [32] as an important tool to simulate the RO in Hybridsim. Analogously, to program the
random oracle in module setting, we need a mechanism to output a uniform random element of
Rd
q. We resort to the following regularity lemma from [26].
Theorem 6 (Adapted from Theorem 4.1 and Corollary 4.2 of [26]). Let A = [Id| ˜A] ←Rd×ℓ
q
,
such that ˜A
$←−Rd×(ℓ−d)
q
is uniformly random and Id is the identity matrix. Then with probability
1 −2−Ω(n) over the choice of ˜A, the distribution of A · s ∈Rd
q, where each element of s ∈Rℓ
q
is sampled from a discrete Gaussian distribution of radius r > 2n · q
d
ℓ+ 2
nℓover R, is within
statistical distance 2−Ω(n) of the uniform distribution over Rd
q.
The theorem implies that, A · s ∈Rd
q can be used to program the output of random oracle if A
and s come from the above-mentioned distributions. Also, we replace the matrix R of LWR
setting with a scalar r
$←−Rq in MLWR setting such that r is invertible modulo (xN + 1). Note
that with A = [Id| ˜A] ∈Rd×ℓ
q
, r · A performs scalar multiplication on each element of A with r,
and the output is [I′
d|r · ˜A]. Here, I′
d is a diagonal matrix with each diagonal element initialized
to r. From [26], we conclude that r · A preserves the matrix format that is eligible for regularity
lemma to be applied, i.e., (r · A) · s is uniform random over Rd
q for suitable distribution of s.
The rest of the proof essentially proceeds in a similar manner.
Concluding the proof. Replacing the leftover hash lemma with the regularity lemma from [26]
and a few obvious changes in dimensions and parameters translate the proof of adaptive security
of LWR-based DPRF into a proof for Construction 2.
3.4
Choice of Parameters for Adaptive DPRF
We summarize the concrete choice of parameters for both the adaptively secure DPRFs. Notably,
in the partial evaluation phase of these adaptive DPRFs, the rounding step transitions values
from modulus q to modulus q1; hence, the error here is of the order of
q
q1 . In other words, the
modulus-to-noise ratio is of the order q
e =
q
q
q1 = q1. The solution to average-case LWR problem
with a smaller modulus-to-noise ratio implies a solution to worst-case lattice problem with a
smaller approximation factor. Hence, the smaller we keep the modulus-to-noise ratio, the harder
it is to solve the underlying worst-case lattice problem. While choosing concrete parameters for
practical instantiations, our objective is to ensure that the modulus-to-noise ratio q
e remains
sufficiently small to mitigate any known attack strategies. We further elaborate on the concrete
choice of parameters for both the instantiations of adaptive DPRFs in the following.
LWR-based Adaptive DPRF. The following parameter set for the LWR-based DPRF, as
suggested by [35], ensures 128-bit security in static corruption scenarios: n = 512, q = 232,
q1 = 228, p = 210. By proof of Theorem 3, the exact same parameter set should also provide
adaptive security. However, in this work, we use a different parameter set, namely, n = 1024, q =
264, q1 = 238, p = 210, while providing experimental results for adaptively secure LWR-based
DPRF. Intuitively, the modulus q, the error proportional to
q
q1 , and the dimension n together
correspond to the security of DPRF whereas the ratio q1
p corresponds to the correctness of
DPRF. Our concrete choice of parameters provides at least 128 bits of security considering the
25

attacks listed in lattice estimator 1 [4].
MLWR-based Adaptive DPRF. We use the following parameter set for MLWR-based DPRF:
N = 256, d = 4, q = 264, q1 = 238, p = 210 to provide at least 128 bits of security. The reasons
behind choosing this parameter set for our construction are the following: (i) there are currently
no known attack on MLWE with these parameters, which are actually comparable to those
used in Kyber [11] (ii) there are no meaningful attack on MLWR that are better than those
on MLWE (in the same way as there are no meaningful attack on LWR that are better than
LWE attacks), and (iii) there are no meaningful attack on RLWE or MLWE that are better
than LWE attacks [3].
4
EQuADiSE: An Application
We consider Distributed Symmetric-key Encryption (DiSE) as a potential application of dis-
tributed PRFs. DiSE was first introduced by [2], where DPRF served as a fundamental building
block, and the security of DiSE was implied by the security of the DPRF. Following the same
line of work, [29] constructed adaptive DiSE by incorporating an adaptively secure version of
DDH-based DPRF. More recently, [35] constructed PQDiSE, where the underlying DPRF is
instantiated with an LWR-based DPRF, and post-quantum security of the DPRF implies post-
quantum security of PQDiSE. In this work, we introduce EQuADiSE (Efficient Quantum-safe
Adaptive DiSE), wherein the DPRF has two different instantiations: one is LWR-based adaptive
DPRF and another is MLWR-based adaptive DPRF (Section 3.2). Our experiment in Section 5
shows that EQuADiSE, with both the instantiations of adaptive DPRF, performs better than
PQDiSE (which is not adaptively secure) and adaptive DiSE (which is not quantum-safe).
We further observe that EQuADiSE, when instantiated with MLWR-based adaptive DPRF,
outperforms the LWR-based adaptive DPRF instantiation since MLWR-based DPRF is more
compact than LWR-based DPRF.
Now, for the sake of completeness, we briefly discuss the original work of DiSE [2]. We then
mention several instantiations of DPRFs from the literature with their detailed constructions in