This work appears in the proceedings of NDSS’26. This is the authors version.
ACTS: Attestations of Contents in TLS Sessions
Pierpaolo Della Monica, Ivan Visconti, Andrea Vitaletti and Marco Zecchini
Sapienza University of Rome, Italy
{dellamonica, visconti, vitaletti, zecchini}@diag.uniroma1.it
Abstract—An essential requirement for the large-scale adop-
tion of Web3 is enabling users to benefit from their data even
within already deployed systems. This raises an important open
question: how can existing, widely adopted software verify that
a user has retrieved specific data from a TLS server?
Impressive scientific results (e.g., DECO [CCS20] and the work
of Xie et al. [USENIX24]) and industrial products (TLSNotary)
have recently made progress in the above challenging direction.
However, while they nicely leave TLS servers untouched, the
retrieved data is then used in computations with verifiers that are
required to run some advanced non-standardized cryptographic
schemes (e.g., ZK-SNARKs), which clearly limit the large-scale
adoption of the proposed technologies.
In this paper, building on top of previous approaches and
relying on the recent concept of Predicate Blind Signatures of
Fuchsbauer and Wolf [Eurocrypt24], we bypass the limits of
prior work by presenting ACTS, a distributed architecture that,
while still leaving TLS servers untouched, it allows a user to show
possession of data retrieved from TLS servers simply requiring
that the software of the verifier can check a standard signature.
Our contributions include a round-optimal predicate blind
signature protocol that produces standard RSA-PSS signatures.
We show how this primitive can be integrated into the DECO
architecture (and its successors) to certify data retrieved from
TLS servers. Furthermore, we have optimized our construction
to make it practical on commodity hardware for a large and
significant class of policies implemented by the notary (i.e.,
the actor that is in charge of obliviously certifying TLS data,
therefore preserving data confidentiality).
We provide an experimental evaluation on the simple but
powerful enough use case of a PDF document downloaded from
a TLS server and encoded into an AES-GCM ciphertext. The
user will then get a certified PDF through a standard PADES
signature added obliviously to the PDF along with some metadata
by a notary service. The resulting standard signed PDF document
can be transparently verified using off-the-shelf PDF readers.
Our experimental validation demonstrates that our architecture
is suitable for real-world deployment in concrete scenarios.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, user data are stored in many servers on the Web.
Typical examples include personal health and banking data,
as well as financial or registry data. Users can usually read
and download their data after an identification phase, and the
entire communication is typically secured by the Transport
Security Layers (TLS) protocol so that the communication is
both confidential and authenticated.
However, it is very common that data downloaded from
servers is not certified. For example, one can download from
the server of a medical laboratory a PDF, with the results of a
blood test, and this file is commonly not digitally signed. This
example can be easily replicated to many other scenarios, and
the TLS protocol — by design — does not leave the client
any useful information to convince others of the authenticity
of the data that has been downloaded from the server.
The consequence of the above state of affairs is that users
cannot provide guarantees on the authenticity of their own data
unless they embark in time and money consuming requests of
ad-hoc certifications, which moreover, are not guaranteed to
succeed since servers might not be willing to cooperate.
The birth of TLS Oracles. Starting in 2020, the seminal
paper called DECO [1], initializes a major line of research
[2, 3, 4]1 in which a third party, named verifier or TLS oracle,
audits the communication between the user and the server. In
particular, in a first phase, the verifier participates, jointly with
the user, in a TLS handshake phase where they jointly play
the role of a client and connect to a TLS server obtaining
shares of the session keys that will be used to secure the
communication of application data. Next, in a second phase,
using the above shares, they jointly produce packets of the
TLS record layer (e.g., encrypted and authenticated HTTP
packets) that are sent to the server. In this second phase, the
verifier does not learn anything about the content of the HTTP
packets sent to the server, thus maintaining the confidentiality
of user data. Once the communication with the server has
ended, the user has the ability to send a cryptographic proof
(specifically, a zero-knowledge proof) demonstrating that the
exchanged application-layer data (e.g., HTTP packets) satisfy
certain properties (i.e., enabling the user to prove to a verifier
properties about the content of a TLS connection established
with a server). For instance, if the server is the website of a
bank, the user can prove to the verifier that she has an account
with this bank and that, in this account, she holds more than
a specific amount of money.
A fundamental key feature of the protocol proposed in [1],
called DECO, lies in the fact that it requires no changes on
the server side, which continues to work exactly as it does
today (i.e., there is no need to modify the widely deployed
TLS protocol and the entire process is transparent to the
server). The above transparency is extremely beneficial and
indeed some companies, such as the decentralized oracle
Chainlink (https://blog.chain.link/deco-sandbox/), are already
using DECO (or variants of it), thanks to its easy integration
with existing services.
A weakness of DECO. The work of Zhang et al. [1] (and
subsequent optimizations [2, 3]) considers three parties: a
server, a user and a verifier. The user should repeat executions
of DECO with every distinct verifier and for every distinct
1TLSNotary and PrimusLabs are industrial projects working in this field.

session engaged with the server. Considering the fact that
DECO introduces a significant overhead, the above workflow
is clearly impractical for large-scale adoption of scenarios
where the user needs to engage with multiple verifiers.
TLSNotary (https://tlsnotary.org), an open-source project
that works in this field, proposes a technique to mitigate
such a problem by introducing an additional player, called
a notary. The notary replaces the verifier in DECO and, once
the communication with the server concludes, she signs the
packet of the record layer of TLS, corresponding therefore to
authenticated encryptions of application data, which typically
consist of HTTP packets exchanged at the application layer
between client and server.
Those ciphertexts signed by the notary can include confi-
dential information of the user and obviously the ciphertexts
protect such confidentiality since the notary does not possess
the decryption key. A verifier who trusts the notary first verifies
that the signature on the encrypted HTTP packets is correct
and, then, receiving the decrypted application data and the
decryption key from the user verifies that the encrypted HTTP
packets are correctly decrypted into the application data. Note
that, with this approach, the notary can collude with a verifier
understanding in which session she has signed the HTTP
packets and giving her the chance to leak other information
about the user. If the notary repeats this process with many
users, this would transform her into a sort of big brother.
To avoid this attack, with TLSNotary, the user must provide
a zero-knowledge proof to the verifier, as in DECO, guarantee-
ing that the data in the hidden plaintext satisfy some properties
(for a visual intuition of this process, we refer the reader
to Fig. 1 and to Sec. I-C). However, such a verification is typi-
cally way beyond what is available in existing systems, where
software is limited to standardized cryptographic features,
such as data encryption and digital signatures. For instance,
Adobe Acrobat Reader is one of the most widely adopted
software used to read PDF files, and it does not include any
implementation of verification algorithms of zero-knowledge
proofs, while it does support the verification of standard digital
signature schemes attached to PDFs. The need to upgrade the
verifier with non-standardized cryptographic tasks is a serious
limitation to the applicability of such techniques in real-world
scenarios and therefore negatively affects the adoption of
DECO and all subsequent protocols [2, 3, 4].
Recall that a key feature of DECO is the transparency for
servers that are not required to update software and to support
non-standardized cryptographic tasks. Clearly, one would also
like the same transparency for verifiers, but proposals in the
state-of-the art are instead “unfriendly” to verifiers.
Notice that one cannot just transfer from the verifier to the
notary the task of verifying a ZK proof since the claim of
the proof can already include confidential information that the
user is not willing to reveal to the notary. Indeed, providing to
the notary all claims that users would like to prove to verifiers
would again transform the notary into a sort of big brother
collecting data from all users, which is obviously undesirable.
Open Problem. In the current state of affairs, there is a
clear tension between allowing servers and verifiers to keep
working using existing software consisting of standardized
cryptographic tools (e.g., digital signatures) only, and the need
to allow a user to show possession of data stored on servers
through a notary, still preserving data confidentiality with
respect to the notary. The open problem that we study in our
work consists of designing a secure protocol that circumvents
the above tension while guaranteeing the following properties:
• a user can convince verifiers about possession of data
stored on servers leveraging a notary service;
• there is no leak of information about user data that can
be abused by the notary;
• the system is completely transparent to servers;
• verifiers only need to use existing software based on
standardized cryptographic tools.
A. Our results
In this work, we solve the above open problem. We present
ACTS (Attestations of Contents in TLS Sessions), a new archi-
tecture that builds upon prior approaches leveraging notaries,
but we deviate in some crucial steps allowing verifiers to rely
solely on existing software that can verify standard signatures.
At the heart of our approach there is the use of an advanced
cryptographic building block that, however, will impact only
on user and notary: predicate blind signatures for standardized
signature schemes.
Brief warm up on blind signatures. Introduced by Chaum in
[5], a blind signature scheme is a protocol between a signer
and a user that allows the latter to obtain a signature on a
message hidden from the signer. Due to their applications (e.g.,
e-cash systems [5], e-voting [6], anonymous credentials [7],
blockchain applications [8]), recently the IETF has realized a
proposal [9] for the standardization of blind signatures over
the standard signature scheme RSA-PSS [10, 11].
Blind signatures are not enough. In our application, we
propose to embed an execution of a blind signature protocol
in the communication between the user and the notary so that
the user gets from the notary (playing as signer) a standard
RSA-PSS signature on the actual application data (e.g., HTTP
packets) without the notary having access to such data. The
verifier can then simply check the signature of the notary on
the downloaded data with standard software. For instance, if
the user, collaborating with the notary, downloads a PDF file
from a server, the notary can blindly sign such a file and the
verifier can check the signature with standard software, like
Adobe Acrobat Reader. However, this approach raises a natural
concern: the notary does not trust the user and obviously she
would refuse to sign arbitrary hidden data.
Upgrading to predicate blind signatures. To overcome the
above barrier, we use the recent notion of Predicate Blind
Signature (PBS) proposed by Fuchsbauer and Wolf [12]. A
PBS scheme generalizes the notion of a blind signature,
allowing the signer to produce a signature on a hidden message
only if the message satisfies some specific properties (i.e.,
it satisfies a predicate) established by both the user and the
2

signer. This notion perfectly fixes the above problem where
a notary was not willing to sign arbitrary data. Indeed, we
can use a PBS scheme so that the notary is guaranteed that
the signature will be applied exactly to some application data
included in the ciphertext (e.g., a PDF downloaded by the
user) without being able to see the signed data.
Since our goal is to allow the verifier to use existing soft-
ware, including standardized cryptographic tools only, we have
designed and implemented a predicate blind signature scheme
that outputs signatures according to the standard and widely
adopted RSA-PSS scheme. We have used our implementation
to blindly sign a PDF encrypted in an AES-GCM ciphertext,
producing a signed PDF according to the standard PADES.
The widely used software Adobe Acrobat Reader successfully
shows the content of the PDF file and moreover confirms that
the PDF is correctly signed by the notary.
Another layer of security: decentralization of the notary.
One might worry about specific scenarios where collusion
between the user and the notary is possible (e.g., when the
content of a TLS communication has a relevant value and the
user can therefore try to bribe the notary).
We notice that we can protect the verifier by strongly
mitigating the above risks through the following requirement:
the user must perform the task of obtaining signed data from a
notary multiple times, each time accessing a different notary.
We envision a setting in which, to avoid a single point of
failure, the verifier requires the user to provide data signed
by multiple notaries. The user, therefore, will produce in the
end a predicate blind multisignature. Notice that the notion of
blind multisignature has recently been introduced in [13].
A natural question is why we choose to rely on blind mul-
tisignatures rather than threshold blind signatures, especially
given that the latter can yield a single signature. To answer
this, we first need to discuss the key differences between
these two primitives. In both notions, the setting is defined
for a single user and multiple signers. In a threshold blind
signature scheme, signers collaboratively generate a single
blind signature, with the requirement that at least t out of
n parties participate (with t ≤n). In contrast, in a blind
multisignature scheme, each signer independently interacts
with the user to produce a blind signature for the same
message, and then these signatures are aggregated by the user.
Although constructions of threshold blind signature schemes
exist [14, 15], it is well known that these schemes typi-
cally lack adaptive security. Adaptive security in this context
refers to the property of the scheme to remain secure (i.e.,
unforgeability holds) even in the case that the malicious
user can corrupt some signers during the execution of the
protocol. Note that in a real-world context, as the one we
proposed before, such a scenario where a user can adaptively
corrupt some notaries could be realistic, especially in the case
where the content of the TLS communication to certify has a
relevant value. That is, for our purpose, we cannot give up on
adaptive security, even though there is currently no scheme that
supports such an advanced security notion. Furthermore, even
if one attempts to construct (for the first time) an adaptively
secure threshold blind signature scheme, in our case, there
is also another additional challenge that the output must be
a standard (e.g., RSA-PSS) signature; this is another major
challenge to overcome since standard signatures are not easily
thresholdizable (e.g., like BLS signatures).
Given these challenges, we opt for (predicate) blind mul-
tisignatures, providing stronger security at the affordable cost
of attaching multiple signatures to the final output. This
choice, however, comes with a notable advantage: it enables
modularity. Specifically, different verifiers may trust different
subsets of notaries, and our approach naturally supports this
by allowing each verifier to extract and validate only the
signatures corresponding to the notaries it trusts.
Moreover, based on our experimental results, we observe
that the size overhead required for including multiple signa-
tures is minimal relative to the size of the underlying content
(e.g., the content of an HTTP communication). In practice,
this keeps our approach efficient and practical, even when a
reasonable number of notaries are involved.
B. Related Works on TLS Oracles
DECO [1], initially derived from the PageSigner protocol
(2014), formalizes the problem of proving the provenance of
TLS data without requiring any server-side modifications. It
introduces the first protocol in which the user and the verifier
jointly emulate a TLS client through an ad hoc two-party
computation (2PC) in the malicious setting. At the end of
the protocol, the user uses a Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non-
Interactive Arguments of Knowledge (zkSNARK) to prove
statements about the data received from the server.
The work of Xie et al. [2] improves the efficiency of
DECO. Their key idea is that they do not change the overall
architecture of the DECO protocol but instead optimize its
internal components. In particular, instead of designing custom
maliciously secure 2PC protocols as done in DECO, the prover
(i.e., the user) sends a garbled circuit to the verifier, who
evaluates it. After the user and verifier interact jointly with the
server and when the communication phase ends, the verifier
reveals its share of the session secrets. At this point, the prover
proves in zero-knowledge (using a highly efficient interactive
protocol based on VOLE [16]) that the garbling was carried
out honestly and consistently. This approach is named garble-
then-prove and significantly reduces both the computation
and communication overhead of DECO. DiStefano [17] and
DIDO [18] further optimize the security and efficiency of
DECO [1] especially for TLS 1.3 version.
Janus [4] builds on the alternative setting described in [1,
App. C.4], where the verifier acts as a proxy between the user
and the server. In this model, the 2PC is performed only during
the TLS handshake. After this phase, the verifier reveals its
key share to the user, who then constructs HTTP requests
independently. These requests are forwarded by the verifier to
the server, effectively reducing the number of 2PC executions.
This proxy-based approach significantly relies on stronger
network assumptions: in particular, the user cannot perform
a man-in-the-middle attack on a network level between the
3

verifier and the server. Janus integrates the garble-then-prove
paradigm into the handshake phase of the TLS 1.3 version,
enhancing the efficiency of the protocol.
Always in the proxy setting, Origo [3] eliminates the need
for 2PC entirely, even during the handshake. It exploits specific
properties of TLS 1.3 to allow the user to generate a SNARK
after the handshake phase with the server, proving that she
acts honestly during this phase. This results in constant-size
communication during the online phase and makes the proto-
col highly suitable for constrained environments or scenarios
involving multiple verifiers. However, Origo still relies on the
above network assumption, limiting the adversarial user from
being a proxy between the verifier and the server. Luo et
al. [19] design a protocol with the same objective as Origo
but without relying on SNARK, but instead directly exploiting
the key-committing property of the authenticated encryption
with associated data schemes used in TLS. However, according
to [4], such an approach might have limitations in terms of
security. We refer the reader to [4, Table 5] and [3, Table 1] for
a comparative summary of the results and key characteristics
achieved by these systems.
Although the proxy-based setting adopted by Janus and
Origo leads to significant efficiency improvements, we do not
follow this approach in our work. As early noted in [1], relying
on the network assumption that the user cannot interfere with
the communication between the verifier and the server weak-
ens the security model. For this reason, we focus exclusively
on designs that do not depend on a proxy and, therefore, on
the above network assumption.
DECO [1] and the works [2, 3] considers three parties: a
user, a verifier, and a server. TLSNotary (https://tlsnotary.org)
is the first project to identify the following problem: the user
should repeat the executions of DECO (or alternative proto-
cols) with every distinct verifier and for every distinct session
engaged with the server. To fix this problem, TLSNotary
introduces a fourth party, a notary, that acts as the verifier in
DECO and, at the end of the protocol, signs the ciphertexts of
the HTTP packets. A verifier who trusts the notary first verifies
that the signature on the encrypted HTTP packets is correct
and, then, verifies a zero-knowledge proof received from the
user, as in DECO, that guarantees that data in the hidden
plaintext satisfy some properties. Janus [4] also considers a
four-party setting with a notary. TLSNotary is an open source
project that implements all the technical components of the
protocols using a 2PC in the malicious setting (specifically,
the Dual Execution with Asymmetric Privacy protocol) for the
handshake and the query phase and a NIZK to prove properties
on the hidden plaintext.
C. Technical Overview
Starting point: DECO. We position our work as a challenging
extension of DECO as in [1] that aims at obtaining a notary
service2 from DECO with the purpose of allowing a user to
2The notary will play on the side of the verifier of DECO.
Server 
Prover 
Notary 
Verifier 
Three-party handshake
Session keys 
Query Execution
Send 
Receive Response 
Commit to 
Verify 
 using 
 and 
 
Proof Generation
Compute
Compute
Protocol
Fig. 1: An overview of ACTS. Note that, we highlight in red
the deviation of our solution with respect to [1]. The last step
can also be interactive and played subsequently.
prove to verifiers3 that she own data stored by TLS servers
and certified by a notary. Such verifiers use existing software
with standardized cryptography only.
Therefore, in order to illustrate our extension, we first need
to show how DECO works (having a notary replacing the
DECO verifier) and then we will present an overview of
our extension. Note that other related works on TLS oracles
(presented in Sec. I-B) follow a similar architecture presented
in the following with only small modifications.
As shown in Fig. 1, which is inspired by Fig. 2 of [1],
DECO is a three-phase protocol. The first phase is a three-
party handshake protocol in which the prover (or user) P, a
notary N, and the TLS server S establish session keys that are
secret-shared between P and N. At the end of the three-party
handshake, P and N receive kP and kN , respectively, while
S receives k = kP + kN .
After the handshake, there is a query execution phase
during which P accesses the server following the standard
TLS protocol, but with the help of N. In the query execution
phase, P and N agree on a query template Query(·) that
will be sent to S. In the query template, the parties agree on
the public parameters of the web request to S (e.g., a URL
for a REST API server), but additionally, it can be fulfilled
with a secret string θS known by P. Hence, Query(·) takes
as input θS. An example query template would be the URL
of a REST API that returns the stock price of TSLA on a
specific day, and, in this case, θS would be the API key
to access such information on S
(e.g., Query(θS)
=
“https://eodhd.com/api/eod/TSLA.US?from=2025-01-
01&to=2025-01-02&period=d&fmt=json&api_token=θS”).
3They are verifiers in the 4-party model, they interact only with the user
and this interaction can happen when the execution of DECO is over already.
4

Note that, for some applications, it is relevant only that P has
been able to download application data R from S without
checking whether the query to S was well-formed. During
the query execution phase, P and N jointly compute the
authenticated encryption of the query Q = Query(θS) that
is then sent to S by P. The server S will respond with the
authenticated encryption of R to P. When the communication
with the server ends, P commits to the query and response
(i.e., P shares with N the ciphertext of R and Q) and N
reveals her key share. Finally, P proves statements about the
response R in a proof generation phase. During this phase
in DECO, the prover proves in zero-knowledge to the notary
that (1) Q was well-formed (i.e. Q = Query(θS)), (2) kP
is combined with kN into a key k′ that correctly decrypts
the authenticated encryption of R and Q, and finally (3) R
satisfies one or more properties.
The crucial upgrade: replacing the ZK proof with a
PBS. We modify the last stage of DECO, deviating from
the design in [1] and embedding the proof generation phase
directly within a blind signature protocol. Note that, in Fig. 1,
the “BlindSignature Protocol” in the dashed box shows our
protocol’s deviation from [1].
In particular, after having
verified locally the integrity of the response R received from
S, P hides R by running with some randomness rand a
probabilistic algorithm, Blind(·), which hides R inside another
message R′ given in output. R′ is sent to N by P. Then,
in the proof generation phase, P additionally proves to N
that 4) she knows the message R and the randomness rand
that have been used as input of Blind(·) to produce R′. Note
that, to ensure that R actually comes from S, P slightly
modifies R adding a piece of information stating that R comes
from a TLS connection with S and proving to N that only
this modification has been added to R (to avoid burdening
the notation, from now on we refer also to this information
when using R). If the proof is verified correctly, the notary
N produces a signature σ′ on R′. Once received σ′, P runs
another algorithm Unblind(·) that takes as input4 σ′ and rand
and that unblinds the signature σ′ producing a new signature σ
that is verified correctly on R. In the end, σ is a cryptographic
signature produced by N without accessing the message R,
thanks to the blindness property of the PBS scheme. The
prover P can now present σ and R to any verifier V to
convince her that P has downloaded R from a server S.
Indeed, if σ is correctly verified with pkN , V trusts that N
has audited the communication between P and S.
Note that when the response R is not randomized, P can
repeat the protocol summarized in Fig. 1 obtaining the same
response R multiple times, involving different notaries, to
obtain a set of signatures that can be combined into a single
multisignature. In this way, we mitigate the risks associated to
a collusion between P and N.
Threat model. The threat model along with the setting and
the actor we consider is in Fig. 1. In our system, we consider
four parties: the server S, the user (also referred to as the
4A run of the (un)blinding takes as input also the public key of N.
prover following DECO’s notation) P, the notary N, and
the verifier V. The user P wishes to obtain authenticated
data from the server S. The notary N helps in auditing the
TLS communication but without learning the context of such
communication (i.e., in a way that P preserves privacy of its
obtained data). Finally, the verifier V is a party that interacts
solely with P, who seeks to convince V that the data received
from S has been certified by the notary N.
Our threat model follows that of DECO, with modifications
to account for our setting. In particular, we consider the follow-
ing adversarial capabilities: (1) A potentially malicious user P
may attempt to convince the verifier V that self-computed data
originated from the server S, thereby fooling the notary N into
attesting to self-computed data. (2) A potentially malicious
notary N may attempt to extract confidential information from
the user’s data while auditing the interaction with the server
S. (3) Importantly, we also consider collusion between P and
N, wherein they cooperate to convince the verifier V of the
authenticity of data that was not generated by the server S.
In such cases, N may attest to data crafted by P without any
legitimate interaction with S.
Our contribution: point-by-point. We summarize the main
contributions of our work below.
▶We design a Predicate Blind Signature (PBS) protocol that
produces standard RSA-PSS signatures, preserving compat-
ibility with widely adopted software (e.g., Adobe Acrobat
Reader). Our construction extends the RSA-BSSA scheme
defined by the IETF standard, enforcing the verification of
a predicate, thus allowing a notary to blindly sign hidden data
only if it satisfies the agreed predicate. This required a signifi-
cantly different design and security analysis, both of which are
key parts of our contribution. The protocol is two-round and
makes use of a non-interactive zero-knowledge (NIZK) proof
to ensure the correctness of the predicate without revealing
the message. The resulting protocol satisfies blindness, based
on the ZK property of the underlying NIZK, and also satisfies
one-more unforgeability, relying on the unforgeability of RSA-
PSS and the proof-of-knowledge property of the NIZK.
▶We define a predicate that certifies that some data were
correctly retrieved from a TLS server, leveraging the DECO
architecture: in particular, we design the predicate to guarantee
to the signer that the ciphertexts of the web requests and
responses were correctly formed and authenticated, and that
the plaintext response satisfies additional application-specific
conditions. We consider this within a four-party setting that
involves a prover, a server, a notary, and a verifier that, with our
PBS protocol, has to rely only on legacy signature verification.
▶We implement and evaluate the entire construction in a
realistic TLS scenario, where a user owning a PDF file of
a realistic size (i.e., 26 KB) obtains a predicate blind RSA-
PSS signature from the notary. The resulting PDF is verifiable
with standard software such as Adobe Acrobat Reader, without
requiring any non-standard cryptographic tool.
▶We implement the NIZK proof system in Circom and
evaluate the performance of two frameworks: (1) a VOLE-
in-the-head (VitH) proof system offering scalability and low
5

memory usage; and (2) Groth16 SNARKs, offering succinct
proofs and fast verification. We demonstrate that the most
demanding part (generating the proof that the blinded message
corresponds to data encrypted with AES) can be performed
efficiently, and we show how to scale the construction to large
files by chunking the SHA256 and AES-CTR computation,
allowing proof generation even on low-resource devices.
II. PRELIMINARIES
We refer to App. A for standard definitions of cryptographic
primitives (e.g., RSA-PSS) and notations (which are almost
identical to those used in [12]).
A. Definition of Predicate Blind Signature Schemes
Here we provide the definition of (predicate) blind sig-
natures (PBS) according to the security model presented
in [12]. In [12] introduces the concept of PBS, which is a
generalization of standard and partial blind signatures [20]. A
PBS scheme is an interactive protocol that enables a signer
to sign a message for another party, called the user, without
learning anything about the signed message, except that it
satisfies certain conditions (defined by a predicate) on which
the user and signer agreed before the interaction.
A PBS scheme is parameterized by a family of polynomial
time computable predicates, which are implemented by a
polynomial time algorithm P : {0, 1}∗× {0, 1}∗→{0, 1},
the predicate compiler, that on input a predicate description
φ ∈{0, 1}∗and a message m ∈{0, 1}∗, outputs 1 if m
satisfies φ, otherwise 0. In a PBS scheme PBS[P] for P we
have the following algorithms5.
• PBS.Stp(1λ) →par on input λ, outputs public parame-
ters par, which define a message space MPBS.
• PBS.KG(par) →(sk, vk) on input the parameters par,
outputs a signing/verification key pair (sk, vk), implicitly
containing par, namely par :⊆vk.
• ⟨PBS.S(sk, φ), PBS.U(vk, φ, m)⟩→(0/1, σ/⊥) is an
interactive protocol, with shared input par (implicit in sk
and vk) and a predicate φ, that is run between two PPT
algorithms PBS.S, the signer algorithm (or the signer)
and PBS.U, the user algorithm (or the user). The signer
takes a signing key sk as private input, the user’s private
input is a verification key vk and a message m. The signer
outputs 1 if the interaction completes successfully and
0 otherwise, while the user outputs a signature σ if it
terminates correctly, and ⊥otherwise.
Note that PBS.U is composed by two sub-algorithms,
namely PBS.U = (PBS.UBld, PBS.UFin) and PBS.S
defines the algorithm PBS.SSig. The interaction, with b
representing a bit, is defined as follows:
(msg0, st) ←PBS.UBld(vk, φ, m),
(msg1, b) ←PBS.SSig(sk, φ, msg0),
σ ←PBS.UFin(st, msg1)
5Note that here following previous works (e.g., see [21, 12]) on blind
signature, we give a definition for a 2-round PBS scheme.
As shorthand for the above sequence we write (0/1,
σ/⊥) ←⟨PBS.S(sk, φ), PBS.U(vk, φ, m)⟩.
• PBS.Vry(vk, m, σ) →0/1 is deterministic and on input
a verification key vk, a message m, and a signature σ,
outputs 1 if σ is valid on m under vk and 0 otherwise.
and such that Correctness, One-More Unforgeability and
Blindness as defined below hold.
Definition
1
(Correctness). A predicate blind signature
scheme PBS for predicate compiler P is perfectly correct if
for every PPT adversary A and λ ∈N the probability in (1)
is equal to 1.
a) One-More Unforgeability.: The one-more unforge-
ability (OMUF) property states that after the completion of ℓ
signing sessions, the user cannot compute ℓ+ 1 distinct valid
message-signature pairs.
In [12] this notion is generalized for PBS schemes. Loosely
speaking, the OMUF property for PBS requires that any output
generated by the user after participating in signing sessions,
using predicates of its choice, must be explicable with respect
to a predicate that was actually used during the sessions.
Specifically, let ℓbe the number of closed signing sessions,
and let φj be the predicate used in the j-th session. Suppose
that the message-signature pairs obtained by the adversary are
(m∗
i , σ∗
i )i∈[κ]. The OMUF property requires the existence of
an injective mapping f : [κ] →[ℓ] so that P(φf(k), m∗
k) = 1
for all k ∈[κ].
Definition 2 (OMUF). Consider the game OMUF in Fig. 2.
A predicate blind signature scheme PBS for a predicate
compiler P satisfies one-more unforgeability (OMUF) if for
every adversary A the advantage Advomuf
PBS[P](A, λ) is negligible
in λ where: Advomuf
PBS[P](A, λ):= Pr
h
OMUFA
PBS[P](λ) = 1
i
.
b) Blindness.: We recall here the notion of blindness for
PBS schemes as in [12]. Following their approach, we adopt
the same definition of blindness for schemes with parameters,
which also covers instantiations without parameters (or with
“empty” parameters). Loosely speaking, the blindness property
for PBS requires that if a signer and a user (or multiple users)
interact n times in n different sessions, producing n signatures,
then later, when the signer sees one of these n signatures
(along with the message for that signature), it cannot identify
(with more than negligible probability) in which session it
was issued. The definition is given in the (more demanding)
malicious-signer model [22].
Definition 3 (Blindness). Consider the game BLD in Fig. 3. A
predicate blind signature scheme PBS for a predicate compiler
P satisfies blindness if for every adversary A the advantage
Advbld
PBS[P](A, λ) is negligible in λ where: Advbld
PBS[P](A, λ):=
Pr
h
BLDA,1
PBS[P](λ) = 1
i
−Pr
h
BLDA,0
PBS[P](λ) = 1
i.
In Fig. 3 sessi for i ∈{0, 1} indicates the round of the i-
th session of the protocol. Moreover, we highlight that in the
Finalize oracle, if sess1−i is not equal to closed the output
is (i, closed). Note that the blindness notions of [12], which
6

Pr


m ̸∈MPBS∨
P(φ, m) = 0∨
(b ∧b′)

par ←PBS.Stp(1λ), (sk, vk) ←PBS.KG(par),
(m, φ) ←A(sk, vk),
(b, σ) ←⟨PBS.S(sk, φ), PBS.U(vk, φ, m)⟩,
b′:=PBS.Vry(vk, m, σ)


(1)
Game OMUFA
PBS[P](λ)
1 :
par ←PBS.Stp(1λ)
2 :
(sk, vk) ←PBS.KG(par); P:=[]
3 :
(m∗
i , σ∗
i )i∈[ℓ] ←ASign(vk)
4 :
if ∃i1 ̸= i2 : m∗
i1 = m∗
i2 return 0
5 :
if ∃i ∈[ℓ] : PBS.Vry(vk, m∗
i , σ∗
i ) ̸= 1 return 0
6 :
if ∃f ∈F([ℓ], [|P|]) : ∀i ∈[ℓ] : P(Pf(i), m∗
i ) = 1 return 0
7 :
return 1
Oracle Sign(φ, msgin)
1 :
(msgout, b) ←PBS.SSig(sk, φ, msgin)
2 :
if b ̸= 1 return msgout
3 :
P = P ←P∥φ
4 :
return msgout
Fig. 2: (Definition) The OMUF game for a PBS PBS[P]. F(I, J ) is the set of injective functions from set I to set J .
Game BLDA,b
PBS[P](λ)
1 :
par ←PBS.Stp(1λ); b0:=b; b1:=(1 −b)
2 :
(φ0, φ1, m0, m1, key, st) ←A1(par)
3 :
if ∃i, j ∈{0, 1} : P(φi, mj) ̸= 1
4 :
return 0
5 :
(sess0, sess1):=(init, init)
6 :
b′ ←ABlind,Finalize
2
(st)
7 :
return (b = b′)
Oracle Blind(i)
1 :
if i ̸∈{0, 1} ∨sessi ̸= init
2 :
return ⊥
3 :
sessi = open; vk:=(par, key)
4 :
(msg, sti) ←PBS.UBld(vk, φi, mbi)
5 :
return msg
Oracle Finalize(i, msg)
1 :
if i ̸∈{0, 1} ∨sessi ̸= open return ⊥
2 :
sessi = closed
3 :
σbi ←PBS.UFin(sti, msg)
4 :
if sess0 = sess1 = closed
5 :
if σ0 = ⊥∨σ1 = ⊥return (⊥, ⊥)
6 :
return (σ0, σ1)
7 :
return (i, closed)
Fig. 3: (Definition) The BLD game for a PBS scheme PBS[P] with an adversary A = (A1, A2).
follow the classical definitions from previous works, can only
ensure the user’s privacy if, at the time the user publishes a
signature, the signer has blindly signed a sufficiently large
number of messages under the same key. In the case of
predicate blind signatures, this requires that many message
predicates are satisfied by the signed message. Moreover,
in the BLD game in
Fig. 3, by allowing the adversary
A1 to output distinct predicates φ0, φ1, the blindness notion
also ensures that the resulting signature does not reveal any
information about the predicate that was used.
III. CONSTRUCTION OF PREDICATE
RSA-PSS BLIND SIGNATURE
We give a construction based on “plain” blind RSA-PSS
signatures, called also RSA-BSSA [23]. In a nutshell, the
protocol is 2-round where it first speaks the user PBS.UBld
and then it responds the signer PBS.SSig algorithm, finally the
user finalize the signature by using the algorithm PBS.UFin.
To obtain predicate blind signature, in 

[…middle truncated for length…]

ow, we give an informal construction PBMSRSA of a
predicate blind multisignature based on PBSRSA: (1) The
setup algorithm PBMSRSA.Stp runs PBSRSA.Stp and outputs
par obtained from PBSRSA.Stp; (2) The key generation al-
gorithm PBMSRSA.KGen run by a signer runs PBSRSA.KG
and outputs (sk, vk) obtained from PBSRSA.KG; (3) The key
aggregation algorithm PBMSRSA.KAgg takes as input a set
of verification keys {vk1, . . . , vkn} and outputs an aggregated
key avk:={(N1, e1), . . . , (Nn, en)}, HPSS, par} (4) The inter-
active protocol between the user PBMSRSA.U and the signers
PBMSRSA.S1, . . . , PBMSRSA.Sn is executed opening n ses-
sions, one with each signer for which it runs multiple times
PBSRSA.U. For each signer i, the algorithm PBSRSA.UBld
takes as input the verification key vki from avk along with
the same message m and the same predicate description φ.
Each signer runs PBMSRSA.S with as input its own secret
key and a message received from the user. For each signer
i, PBSRSA.UFin outputs a partial signature σi. Once all ses-
sions with the signers are terminated, PBMSRSA.U outputs
a signature σ:={σ1, . . . , σn}. (5) The verification algorithm
PBMSRSA.Ver takes as input the aggregated key avk, the
message m and the signature σ. Then, for every partial
signature σi ∈{σ1, . . . , σn}, the algorithm extracts the i-th
verification key from avk and runs PBSRSA.Vry passing as
input vki, m and σi. If at least one execution of PBSRSA.Vry
outputs 0 then PBMSRSA.Ver, otherwise it outputs 1.
Since the construction of PBMS is mainly an iteration of
multiple executions of PBSRSA, the security of the OMUF
and the blindness properties are based on the security of the
OMUF and blindness property of PBSRSA, which are shown
to be secure, respectively, in Thm. 2 and in Thm. 1.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Here we show experimentally that ACTS can be used
for real-world scenarios. Specifically, we tested a scenario
in which a user obtains from a notary a standard RSA-PSS
signature of a certificate of attendance released as a PDF file
which has been downloaded from a server with TLS (the user
receives the PDF in TLS encrypted with AES).
The results of the experiments, presented in Sec. IV-B, prove
the viability of our approach, however the resources necessary
to generate the proof are quite significant. In Sec. IV-C we
discuss a technique to reduce the necessary resources through
which users can flexibly generate proofs for downloaded data
of virtually any size, with computation time scaling according
to the resources available to them.
The most resource-intensive part of our experiment is the
generation of the NIZK proof in line 5 of the algorithm
PBSRSA.UBld in Fig. 4. This proof attests that the downloaded
PDF message, encrypted using AES in counter mode (as in
TLS), is the same message that is blinded according to the
RSA-BSSA standard defined by the IETF in [9].
Finally, the blind signature produced by the notary is
unblinded and embedded into the PDF in a way that allows
standard software, in our case Adobe Acrobat Reader, to verify
it. All components used to evaluate the performance of the
protocol of Fig. 4 are available on GitHub [28].
A. Main Technical Choices
The RSA-BSSA signature protocol defined in [9] is imple-
mented in Rust in a library available on Github [29].
We used Circom to write the NIZK circuit of PBSRSA7
and we generated the proof with two different approaches: a
Vole-in-the-Head (VitH) proof system [30] and Groth16 proof
system [31]. For the former, we used a recent Rust library
available on Github [32]. For the latter, we used Snarkjs to
set up the proof system and Rapidsnark to generate the proof.
We chose these two approaches because VitH is a recent proof
system that guarantees by design scalability and low memory
usage while Groth16 offers succinct proofs, fast verification
and it is widely adopted in many application scenarios; this
7We used Circom both to write the circuit and to compile it into a
Rank 1 Constraint System (R1CS).
10

has fostered the development of efficient frameworks (such as
Rapidsnark).
In
PBSRSA,
during
the
execution
of
the
algorithm
PBSRSA.UBld in Fig. 4, the message is first encoded with
HPSS.Enc. This encoding works as follows: the message is
first hashed with SHA256 (or one of the other SHA-like
hash functions) and then the output is padded according to
the PSS specification. Then, this padded value is given as
input to a mask generation function, and its result is given
as output by HPSS.Enc. In PBSRSA.UBld, this value is finally
randomized with a modular exponentiation. We instantiated
the circuit of PBSRSA.UBld adopting some Circom imple-
mentations already available online, such as [33] for SHA256
and [34] for modular RSA exponentiation. The AES counter
mode circuit used in TLS1.2 and TLS1.3, relys on the Circom
implementation available online [35]. The embedding of the
RSA-PSS standard signature in the PDF has been implemented
using Pyhanko [36].
Compliance with standard PDF signatures. A PDF is
a structured document format composed of a sequence of
objects, organized into a body, a cross-reference table and a
trailer. The body contains the actual content (text, images,
annotations) as well as metadata and form fields. Digital
signatures can be stored as /Sig objects, typically referenced
within the document /AcroForm or /Annots entries. The
cryptographic signature itself is embedded in the /Contents
field of the /Sig object and formatted as a CMS structure
(PKCS #7 SignedData). To ensure a consistent and verifiable
signature process, the PDF standard ISO 32000-1/2:2020 [37]
defines the /ByteRange field, which specifies the exact
ranges of bytes in the file that are included in the compu-
tation of a digest. The signer computes the cryptographic
hash (e.g., using SHA256) over these ranges, embeds it in
a structure of signed attributes (including content type and
signing time), and then signs this structure. The resulting CMS
object (PKCS#7 SignedData), which contains the signature,
the attributes and optionally the certificate, is inserted into the
/Contents field. This procedure guarantees compatibility
with existing PDF viewers and signature verification tools,
such as Adobe Acrobat Reader. In the Circom circuit, we have
implemented this process by first computing the SHA256 hash
on the PDF and then computing the SHA256 hash on the
SignedData object (which contains the previously computed
hash). This second hash value is used as input for the rest of
PBSRSA.UBld, implemented in the circuit.
B. Experimental results
We executed the complete PBSRSA protocol on a realistic
template of a PDF file that certifies attendance to a conference
(see Fig. 10, Appendix App. B). The size of the document is
26KB and contains both text and images.
The most challenging part of the process is the generation
of the NIZK proof. Our circuit operates receiving as input
the PDF file, the CMS object (PKCS#7 SignedData), the
randomness required to compute the blinding value and PSS
encoding, the AES encryption key, an initialization vector for
AES, the RSA modulus and the exponent.
The circuit performs the following steps: (1) it computes the
SHA256 hash of the PDF; (2) it computes the SHA256 hash
of the SignedData object, which includes the hash obtained in
step (1); (3) it executes the blinding algorithm PBSRSA.UBld;
(4) it performs AES encryption in counter mode on the PDF;
and (5) it returns as output the ciphertext and the blinded
message. The signer then checks that the two output values
match those received from the user.
Note that TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3 work, among other schemes,
with AES-GCM. In AES-GCM, every block of plaintext is
encrypted with AES-CTR and, then, each block of ciphertext is
authenticated in the following way: the ciphertext is multiplied
in a Galois field and XORed with a running accumulator.
This process combines all ciphertext blocks and additional
authenticated data (AAD) into a single authentication tag.
This authentication tag is finally XORed with the AES en-
cryption of the first counter of AES-CTR producing the
final authentication tag. To lighten the computation of the
NIZK, we leave to the notary the verification of the GCM
authentication tag because it does not disclose any information
on the plaintext; the user only has to provide to the notary a
NIZK that the AES encryption of the first counter has been
correctly computed, which can be computed with very few
computational resources.
To optimize the memory required for the generation of
the proof, we used a VitH-based proof system. Performance
metrics show that for a real-world PDF file (see Fig. 10) of
26.7 KB, we can generate a valid proof that can be successfully
verified by Adobe Acrobat Reader, as shown in Fig. 10 .
In this initial implementation, the compiled circuit size is
34.69 GB and the proof generation needs 328.071 seconds
and 201.65 GB of RAM. We emphasize that this is not a
fundamental limitation of our approach, and indeed in the
next section we discuss some optimization techniques that can
strongly reduce memory requirements to largely fit within the
32 GB available on commodity hardware (see Tab. I).
C. Dealing with large data
A valid criticism of our feasibility results concerns the
amount of RAM used in the previous experiment, which may
not be available to most users. Users usually own devices
with much less resources (we consider < 32 GB of RAM). In
addition, it is unclear how to run our protocol on larger PDF
files, which are quite common in practice, without requiring
a very large amount of RAM avaiable to few.
Recently, in [38, 39], the authors demonstrated that it is
possible to design efficient proof systems for images, requiring
only few GBs of RAM to compute a proof for images up to ∼
30 MP (in raw RGB 30MP corresponds to ∼90 MB), on the
order of minutes. Specifically, the authors of [38] exploit the
iterative nature of SHA256. Indeed, SHA256 works in rounds
and, in each round, the algorithm hashes a portion of the input
message.The authors of [38] devised a proof for each round
11

Input (bytes)
Constraints
Circuit Size (MB)
Approach
Proving Time (s)
RAM (GB)
Proof Size
128
530,793
135.73
VitH
0.96
0.07
18.69 MB
SNARK
3.75
2.21
800 bytes
256
1,032,665
265.05
VitH
2.18
0.13
36.17 MB
SNARK
4.11
2.33
800 bytes
512
2,036,409
524.82
VitH
3.94
0.35
71.13 MB
SNARK
5.54
2.61
800 bytes
1024
4,043,897
1048.96
VitH
7.95
0.57
141.02 MB
SNARK
7.16
3.72
800 bytes
2048
8,058,873
2115.58
VitH
15.52
1.15
280.82 MB
SNARK
11.73
6.83
800 bytes
4096
16,088,825
4322.24
VitH
33.81
2.88
560.42 MB
SNARK
21.49
13.13
800 bytes
TABLE I: Benchmark results comparing proof generation time, memory usage, and proof size for NIZK proofs using the VitH
and SNARK backends across varying input sizes.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Input Size (Bytes)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Average Time (s)
VitH
SNARK
(a) Proving time with increasing input size.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Input Size (Bytes)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Proof Size (MB)
VitH
SNARK
(b) Proof size with increasing input size.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Input Size (Bytes)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Memory Usage (MB)
VitH
SNARK
(c) Memory usage with increasing input size.
Fig. 5: Benchmark comparison between VitH and SNARK approaches.
(or set of rounds) of SHA256 using only the necessary portion
of the image as input.
A similar approach can be extended to AES in Counter
Mode which also follows an iterative approach, processing
a 128 bit block of plaintext at a time. In each round, a
counter value is first encrypted using the AES key, producing a
keystream block, which is then XORed with the corresponding
plaintext block to produce the ciphertext. As in the case of
SHA256, it is therefore possible to generate a proof for each
encryption round independently by feeding the circuit only
with the necessary portion of the message and the correspond-
ing counter input, thus significantly reducing memory usage
during proof generation. That is, by directly leveraging and
extending to AES the technique of [38], the user can combine
these two proofs: a) the correct computation of the SHA256
round on the original file, and b) the correctness of the AES
encryption round. Note that, following [38], our approach
generalizes to any Merkle-Damgård/Sponge hash function and
encryption through block ciphers. We use SHA256 and AES-
GCM because they are standardized for RSA-PSS signatures
and TLS. We note that if different encryption/hash functions
are used (e.g., more SNARK-friendly functions such as Posei-
don hash and/or Ciminion encryption), proof generation would
be significantly faster.
A natural question is how such a approach impacts on
the performance of proof generation. For this reason, we
ran a set of experiments aiming to measure the trend of
such performance with increasing input size to the circuit.
In particular, we implement a circuit that takes as input a
message, an AES encryption key and an initialization vector
for AES and, then, computes 1) the SHA256 algorithm on
the message and 2) the AES in Counter Mode encryption
algorithm on the same message. We have generated the NIZK
for this circuit for both VitH and Groth16 proof systems and
compared their performances. The results are reported in Tab. I
and in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 5c, the real advantage of using VitH is
that the use of memory increases linearly with the size of the
input and uses much less memory with respect to the Groth16
proof generation. This comes at the cost of a larger proof size
(as shown in Fig. 5b) that increases linearly with the size of
the input, while the proof size of Groth16 remains constant.
Finally, Fig. 5a shows that the proof generation time grows
linearly with respect to the input size for both proof systems.
In general, with the technique described in this section,
our approach became inherently scalable and applicable to a
wide range of use-cases: each user can independently generate
proofs tailored to their specific requirements and computa-
tional resources, enabling the protocol to accommodate a broad
class of users, including those with limited hardware. Users
12

can flexibly generate proofs for downloaded data of virtually
any size, with computation time scaling according to the
resources available to them.
That is, using this approach memory usage remains constant
regardless of input size, since each chunk requires the same
amount of memory (see Tab. I). Consequently, the practical
bound is determined by the available hardware and the user’s
proof size constraints: more memory permits larger (and
therefore fewer) chunks, reducing the number of per-chunk
proofs to compute, whereas users with limited hardware can
still produce a proof by processing many very small chunks,
at the cost of increased proof size.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we presented ACTS, a distributed architecture
that connects standard TLS servers with the Web3, maintaining
untouched the software of existing servers and verifiers.
Our approach, building on top of DECO and of predicate
blind signature schemes, makes progress towards closing the
gap left open by previous works by enabling verification
through standard digital signatures. This removes the need for
complex cryptographic tools on the verifier’s side and supports
immediate integration with existing systems.
By making standard verification possible, ACTS can be
used in a wide range of real-world domains that could benefit
from this technology, potentially leading to widespread adop-
tion. In our view, this represents a major step towards a large-
scale adoption of Web3 technologies. In particular, our system
enables Web3 applications where smart contracts verify the
signatures of messages certified by a notary about data stored
in Web2 servers.
We also described how to decentralize the notary service
through multisignatures. Improving the usability of this setting
is a great challenge for future work.
Moreover, given that
there currently exists no post-quantum (PQ) secure version of
DECO that can be applied to PQ-secure TLS, and practical
blind signatures for standardized PQ schemes (e.g., Falcon,
Dilithium, SPHINCS+) do not yet exist, we opted for RSA-
PSS signatures and (non-PQ) TLS-DECO. Nevertheless, in-
vestigating PQ PBS alternatives for standardized schemes that
can be used with a future PQ-secure version of DECO is an
interesting direction for future work.
A natural direction building on our work is the explo-
ration of decentralized credential mechanisms with enhanced
privacy guarantees. Specifically, by leveraging ACTS, one
can, in principle, ensure that the notary remains oblivious
to which credential is being issued, and more generally to
whether a given interaction results in credential issuance. In
this paradigm, users can obtain standardized credentials (e.g.,
W3C Verifiable Credentials bound to Decentralized Identifiers)
while the web servers and the notary remain completely
unaware of which sessions produce credentials, thereby pre-
venting selective censorship.
Although this seems a straightforward path, there is, in
reality, much more work to accomplish. First, the standards
for verifiable credentials, even those defined by the W3C, are
not just signatures but more complex schemes that need to
be formalized and integrated into our architecture. Second, in
this work, we focus on the security of the underlying PBS
and do not provide a security proof for the entire architectural
design (as we essentially replace a component of DECO,
and its descendants, with a PBS). Instead, formalizing such a
credential system requires a completely new analysis, along
with a proper and complete security proof. We view this
direction as both promising and interesting, especially as an
attractive candidate for anonymous credentials in high-stakes
settings such as the EUDI Wallet, and we hope that future
research is conducted in this area.