Experimental Validation of AUX scheme for
Quantum Homomorphic Encryption on IBM
Quantum Platforms
1st Gia Phat Dang
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0009-0006-4903-0376
2rd Weisheng Si
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0000-0002-1239-7880
3rd Belal Alsinglawi
Zayed University
Abu Dhabi, U.A.E
0000-0003-0316-3641
4nd Jim Basilakis
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0000-0002-7440-1320
Abstract—Quantum Homomorphic Encryption (QHE)
addresses Quantum Cloud Computing (QCC) security
concerns by ensuring the privacy of a client’s data and
algorithms when outsourced to untrusted third-party
quantum servers. However, current QHE schemes face
significant challenges: scaling computational resources
introduces overhead and hardware noise, degrading
accuracy and compromising security. This paper imple-
ments and analyses a non-interactive AUX-QHE scheme
that employs pre-generated auxiliary states for universal
computation. We identify three critical computational
bottlenecks: exponential growth in auxiliary state count,
complex homomorphic evaluation, and extensive symbolic
key updates. Through experimental evaluation on IBM
Quantum hardware, we quantify the impact of NISQ
noise on AUX-QHE performance and establish practical
resource thresholds for deployment. Our results bridge
the gap between theoretical QHE frameworks and their
practical implementation on noisy quantum devices,
providing concrete benchmarks for future noise mitigation
efforts.
Index Terms—Quantum Cloud Computing (QCC),
Quantum
Homomorphic
Encryption
(QHE),
Auxil-
iary (AUX), Quantum Error Correction (QEC), Noisy
Intermediate-scale Quantum (NISQ)
I. INTRODUCTION
Existing QCC is a hybrid model that connects clas-
sical cloud infrastructure to current quantum hardware,
enabling clients to remotely access quantum computing
without local hardware [1]. However, this QCC archi-
tecture could expose sensitive data during delegated
computation, posing serious challenges for high-data
confidentiality fields such as defence, healthcare, and
finance [2]. The QHE concept is recognised as a secure
computation protocol, as it allows a quantum server
to compute on encrypted data without decrypting the
initial quantum states [3], [4].
Accepted for publication in the Proceedings of the 2026 IEEE
International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking,
and Computing (QCNC), Kobe, Japan, April 2026. © 2026 IEEE.
Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE
must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or
promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale
or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted
component of this work in other publications.
Homomorphic evaluation over encrypted quantum
states efficiently handles Clifford gates. However,
evaluating non-Clifford gates, which are essential for
achieving Quantum Fully Homomorphic Encryption
(QFHE) and universal quantum computation, introduces
a theoretical fundamental challenge: unexpected Phase
error [4]. Yu et al. show that the no-go theorem prevents
meeting all of QFHE’s conditions: universality, compact
decryption, information-theoretic security, and non-
interactive operation. As a result, each practical QHE
algorithm must sacrifice one of these conditions. This
leads to high computational overhead and substantial
hardware requirements, which limit practical deploy-
ment [3].
Broadbent and Jeffery (2015) [5] introduced a non-
interactive QHE scheme. They integrated this with
a classical Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE)
scheme to address no-go theorem limitations. The
FHE-QHE scheme has two evaluation methods: AUX
and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR). Both aim to fix
phase errors from T-gate operations during quantum
computation [5]. The EPR uses Bell pair entanglement
to delay T-gate errors. The AUX prepares correction
tools in advance.
Building on these foundations, Fernandez and Martin-
Delgado [6] simulated the EPR approach for Grover’s
algorithm in the Qiskit environment, revealing that the
algorithm succeeds only with three qubits and at most 7
(T/T †) gates. Similarly, Ganjian et al [7] demonstrated
the FHE-QHE scheme using the EPR evaluation
method, demonstrating a practical threshold of 6 T-
gates. Across these implementations, the theoretical
and experimental EPR schemes introduce algorithmic
computation noise and become impractical with many
T-gates.
For AUX, generating auxiliary qubits quickly be-
comes theoretically infeasible at high T-depth [5].
Alagic et al. [8] proposed a vQFHE scheme, TrapTP,
that leverages a classical FHE scheme to mitigate the
additional overhead associated with auxiliary inputs.
However, this vQFHE scheme exhibits an exponential
increase in the complexity of evaluation keys, which

requires large-scale quantum infrastructure. Mahadev
[9] proposed an alternative approach that uses a
classical FHE method to handle T-gate computations,
replacing the quantum EPR or AUX. Although this
approach can evaluate circuits with a polynomial
number of T-gates, it introduces large ciphertexts and
significant overhead in classical computation. Despite
these theoretical advances and significant exploration
of AUX-QHE and related QHE variants, no practical
FHE-AUX-QHE framework has yet been implemented
on actual Noisy Intermediate-scale Quantum (NISQ)
systems. Existing studies offer limited practical noise-
adaptation strategies or detailed resource analyses
for the AUX method. This research fills these gaps
by implementing and evaluating FHE-AUX-QHE on
quantum hardware, assessing its practicality in real-
world noise environments, and establishing benchmarks
for noise mitigation and resource requirements. Our
contributions are as follows:
• We design and implement all complex features of
the AUX-QHE algorithm, including pre-generated
auxiliary qubits and symbolic key management.
These elements establish a practical foundation
for AUX methods, enabling precise identification
of computational overheads.
• By analysing the performance of the scheme on
the IBM Quantum platform, we assess the impact
of noisy hardware, which helps understand the
feasibility of AUX and EPR in practice.
These strategies are vital for understanding scalability
factors toward practical QHE and ensuring its compat-
ibility with future QFHE models.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 reviews related work and gaps in the AUX
method in QHE algorithms. Section 3 outlines the
theoretical background and evaluation methodology.
Section 4 describes the algorithm’s implementation on
IBM Quantum. Section 5 describes the experimental
approach. Sections 6 and 7 analyse results and discuss
implications for scalability and feasibility.
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
A. Architecture of QHE Algorithms
The QHE scheme, particularly when combined
with classical FHE as described by Broadbent and
Jeffery [5], is typically composed of four core algo-
rithms: Key Generation (QHE.KeyGen), Encryption
(QHE.Enc), Homomorphic Evaluation (QHE.Eval),
and Decryption (QHE.Dec). Initially, the client uses
Quantum One-Time Pad (QOTP) to encrypt quantum
information by applying random Pauli-X and Pauli-Z
operations, determined by secret keys [10], [11]. The
server then performs quantum homomorphic evaluation
(QHE.Eval), which must maintain encryption while
correctly updating the QOTP keys to ensure proper
decryption—a procedure known as key updating [12].
Nearly all QHE algorithms decompose into two parts:
Clifford gate evaluation (X, Z, H, P, and CNOT gates)
and non-Clifford gate evaluation (T-gates) [13]. The
non-Clifford evaluation introduces an unexpected T-
gate challenge, which becomes the primary obstacle
in this QHE concept 1. Finally, the client recovers the
updated keys and decrypts the QOTP encryption via
inverse Pauli operations.
Fig. 1: Relationship between QOTP and Homomorphic
Evaluation within QHE
B. Fundamental EPR And AUX Evaluation
Among the various non-interactive QHE schemes, the
EPR and AUX methods are recognised as foundational
approaches for universal quantum computations [3],
[4], [9].
The EPR approach leverages quantum entanglement
via Bell pairs to defer P-gate corrections until decryp-
tion, thereby shifting the computational burden to the
decryption phase [5]. This method allows unrestricted
T-gate arrangement and arbitrary quantum circuits in
QHE algorithms. However, this deferral strategy leads
to quadratic growth in decryption complexity, which
severely limits the scalability of the EPR framework.
The AUX-based approach (AUX-QHE) offers an al-
ternative by using pre-generated auxiliary qubits to han-
dle T-gate evaluation, expressed as: |+f,k⟩= ZkP f|+⟩
[5]. The AUX framework maintains compact decryption
while proactively managing T-gate phase errors through
specialised quantum circuits called T-gadgets, which
are designed to control conditional P-gate errors. As
shown in Fig 2, although the EPR and AUX evaluation
methods both utilise T-gate gadgets, these gadgets are
implemented differently due to distinct mechanisms for
handling T-gates and key updates. In the AUX approach,
T-gadgets consume auxiliary qubits to process T-gates
homomorphically, effectively isolating phase errors and
maintaining encryption security.
While the AUX approach offers more efficient de-
cryption compared to EPR, it faces a critical scalability
challenge: the number of required auxiliary states grows

exponentially with the circuit’s T-depth. For a circuit
with T-depth L and n as the number of qubits, the
auxiliary resource requirement scales as O(n2L−1+1),
making large-scale implementations computationally
prohibitive [5].
Fig. 2: Differences between the EPR and AUX schemes
C. Hardware Noise Analysis
NISQ hardware faces significant challenges, in-
cluding limited qubit counts (100 to 1000 qubits),
significant error rates (gate fidelities approximately
99%), restricted computational depth and short qubit
coherence times [14]. These constraints limit both
the complexity of executable quantum algorithms
and the implementation of Quantum Error Correction
(QEC), which requires thousands of physical qubits per
logical qubit [15]. Consequently, NISQ devices impose
stringent resource and noise-tolerance requirements on
quantum algorithms, particularly for resource-intensive
schemes such as QHE.
For QHE specifically, computational overhead from
non-Clifford evaluation amplifies hardware noise be-
yond simulated environments [16]. Since QEC remains
infeasible on current hardware [17], Quantum Error
Mitigation (QEM) focuses on mitigating hardware
noise through post-processing of measurement results
without modifying the underlying quantum circuit [18].
These QEM methods leverage the inherent error char-
acteristics of quantum hardware and utilise statistical
techniques, such as Probabilistic Error Cancellation
(PEC) and Zero-Noise Extrapolation (ZNE), to mitigate
noise effects [19]. Although QEM has significantly
reduced errors, its effectiveness is constrained by
fundamental noise levels and sampling overhead.
III. IMPLEMENTATION METHODOLOGY
We demonstrate the FHE-AUX-QHE framework with
auxiliary-state management and validate its perfor-
mance under hardware noise on the IBM Quantum
platform [20]. The implemented algorithm consists of
Algorithm 1 AUX-QHE: Complete Protocol with Five
Phases
Require: Circuit C (n qubits, T-depth L), security λ
Ensure: Homomorphically evaluated circuit with error mitigation
1: // Phase 1: Key Generation
2: (pk, sk, evk) ←BFV.KeyGen(1λ); a, b ←{0, 1}n; V ←{ai :
a[i], bi : b[i]}i∈[n]; T1 ←{ai, bi}i∈[n]; A ←{}
3: ∀ℓ∈[2, L]: Tℓ←Tℓ−1 ∪{tt′ : t, t′ ∈Tℓ−1} ∪{ki,ℓ−1 : i ∈
[n]}
4: ∀(ℓ, i, t):
k
←
H(ℓ, i, t) mod 2;
s
←
t(V) mod 2;
A[(ℓ, i, t)] ←(ZkP s|+⟩, s, k)
5: // Phase 2: Encryption
6: Cenc
←
XaZb · C;
˜ai
←
BFV.Encpk(a[i]), ˜bi
←
BFV.Encpk(b[i]) ∀i
7: // Phase 3: Homomorphic Evaluation
8: f (i)
a
←“ai”, f (i)
b
←“bi” ∀i; Ceval ←∅; τ ←1
9: for each gate g in Cenc do
▷Update key formulas per gate
10:
Hi: swap(f (i)
a , f (i)
b
); CNOTi,j: f (j)
a
⊕←f (i)
a , f (i)
b
⊕←f (j)
b
;
Si: f (i)
b
⊕←f (i)
a
11:
Tq: (|ψ⟩, s, k) ←A[(τ, q, f (q)
a
)]; c ←H(f (q)
a
, k) mod 2;
cv ←“c” q τ; kv ←“k” q τ; V[cv] ←c; V[kv] ←k;
f (q)
a
⊕←cv; f (q)
b
←f (q)
a
⊕f (q)
b
⊕kv; if c=1: f (q)
b
⊕←
f (q)
a
; τ ←τ + 1
12:
Ceval.add(g)
13: end for
14: ˜a′
i ←BFV.Evalevk(f (i)
a , V); ˜b′
i ←BFV.Evalevk(f (i)
b
, V) ∀i
15: // Phase 4: Decryption
16: a′
i ←BFV.Decsk(˜a′
i) mod 2; b′
i ←BFV.Decsk(˜b′
i) mod 2 ∀i;
Cdec ←Ceval · Zb′Xa′
17: // Phase 5: Error Mitigation (ZNE)
18: If
ZNE:
∀λ
∈
[1, 1.5, 2, 2.5]:
D.add((λ, Execute(Amplify(Cdec, λ))));
return
(Cdec, FitModel(D).extrap(0))
19: return Cdec
five phases: key generation, encryption, homomorphic
evaluation, decryption, and error mitigation.
A. Key Generation and QOTP Encryption
The key generation phase (lines 2-4) initialises
Brakerski-Fan-Vercauteren (BFV) keys and random
QOTP keys. The term set Tℓcaptures all possible key-
polynomial expressions, while the variable dictionary V
tracks all key-related values (lines 2,3). Pre-generated
auxiliary states |+f,k⟩are deterministically computed
using hash functions (line 4). The encryption phase
(line 6) then applies QOTP via Pauli operations and
encrypts the QOTP keys using BFV.
B. Homomorphic Evaluation and Auxiliary Manage-
ment
The homomorphic evaluation phase (lines 8-10)
maintains encryption while updating symbolic key
representations f (i)
a , f (i)
b
to enable proper decryption.
Clifford gates update keys according to deterministic
rules that preserve the QOTP structure (line 10), ensur-
ing consistent symbolic key management throughout
the process. When processing non-Clifford gates, the
algorithm employs T-gadgets with pre-generated auxil-
iary states to handle phase errors (lines 11). For each
T-gate, the auxiliary state is retrieved, a deterministic
measurement outcome c is computed, and keys are
updated, with conditional correction when c = 1 (line
11). After completing all gate operations, the symbolic

key polynomials are homomorphically evaluated using
BFV (line 14), producing encrypted updated keys that
account for all gate transformations.
C. QOTP Decryption and Error mitigation techniques
The decryption phase (line 16) recovers the updated
keys using BFV and then removes the QOTP encryption
via inverse Pauli operations. Error mitigation follows
using ZNE (lines 18-19), which executes circuits at
noise-scaling factors A, fits exponential models, and
extrapolates to the zero-noise limit. Additionally, IBM
Quantum’s circuit optimisation levels (0 and 3) are also
evaluated to assess the impact of transpilation on noise
exposure.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The FHE-AUX-QHE algorithm is executed in both
local simulation (Table I) and quantum hardware
(Table II). Our demonstration builds the classical
symbolic computations and a quantum circuit via IBM
Qiskit on a MacBook M3 Max with 36GB of RAM,
using the IBM Quantum backend (ibmtorino) with 133
qubits [21].
We design three test-case circuits with configurations
denoted as nq-Lt, where n is the number of qubits and
L is the T-depth: 5q-2t, 4q-3t, 5q-3t, with (e.g., 5q-
3t denotes a 5-qubit circuit with 3 T-gates). based on
theoretical auxiliary scaling [5]. Each circuit includes
single-qubit Clifford gates (H, S), CNOT gates for
entanglement, and three randomly placed T gates.
Algorithmic correctness is validated by using the
fidelity F-score, comparing decrypted circuit outputs
with unencrypted circuits. [5]. Moreover, we analyse
resource overhead computational metrics, including the
number of auxiliary states, the accumulated polynomial
cross-product, and layer size.
B. Fidelity and Correctness Analysis
Table I confirms algorithmic correctness with per-
fect fidelity (F
= 1.0) for all configurations in
simulation. By comparison, Table II reveals severe
hardware noise degradation across all configurations.
For 5q-2t, standalone ZNE reduces fidelity below the
baseline (F = 0.3569) to (F = 0.3296), while Opt-3
(F = 0.3618) and the combined Opt-3+ZNE method
(F = 0.3782) yield improvements. In the 4q-3t case,
all three mitigation methods produce lower fidelities
than the baseline F = 0.1222, suggesting that at higher
T-depth, mitigation overhead may introduce additional
noise rather than reducing it. For 5q-3t, ZNE alone
produces the lowest fidelity (F = 0.1175), while both
Opt-3 (F = 0.1293) and Opt-3+ZNE (F = 0.1305)
improve over the baseline (F = 0.1199).
C. Algorithmic computational noise
Section B of Table I shows that auxiliary states
increase from 575 (5q-2t) to 10,776 (4q-3t) and 31,025
(5q-3t), illustrating exponential growth as T-depth rises.
The efficiency metric captures the growing number of
auxiliary states per qubit layer, from 287.5 to 10,341.7.
These figures show that auxiliary state growth becomes
the dominant computational cost in QHE. Section C of
Table I presents the corresponding operational times.
For 5q-2t, auxiliary preparation takes only 0.009s,
yielding a total runtime of 0.042s. For 5q-3t, auxiliary
preparation increases to 0.597s, accounting for 90.0%
of the total runtime of 0.664s. Notably, decryption time
remains stable across all configurations (0.031–0.032s),
confirming that the AUX approach maintains compact
decryption independent of circuit complexity.
D. Symbolic Key Complexity
Section B of Table I shows that symbolic QOTP
key cross-terms grow rapidly with T-depth, increasing
from 45 (5q-2t) to 5,505 (5q-3t) — a 121-fold increase.
Layer sizes track Tℓoperations at each T-depth, growing
from (10, 105) at 5q-2t to (10, 105, 6090) at 5q-3t,
demonstrating exponential scaling. While classical BFV
evaluation remains fast at low T-depths (Section C), the
rapid growth of cross-terms at higher T-depths poses a
risk of exceeding quantum decoherence time limits.
V. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Hardware experiments demonstrate that the FHE-
AUX-QHE algorithm faces fundamental constraints
on current NISQ systems that are not captured by
theoretical analysis, which assumes ideal noise-free
operation.
A. NISQ Feasibility and Security Implications
The gap between simulation (F = 1.0) and hardware
fidelities (F = 0.12–0.38) reveals both practical and
security challenges for deploying QHE on NISQ de-
vices. Our experiments identify two primary scalability
bottlenecks: exponential growth in auxiliary states with
increasing T-depth and rapid increases in symbolic
key complexity. At the 5q-3t configuration, auxiliary-
state requirements reach 31,025, with 5,505 cross-
terms, representing the practical upper bound for current
systems. From a security standpoint, the FHE-AUX-
QHE scheme is proven q-IND-CPA secure [5], where
QOTP provides information-theoretic encryption and
BFV ensures computational key protection based on
the Learning With Error (LWE) assumption. However,
since QHE security fundamentally depends on correct
computation over encrypted data, low hardware fidelity
poses a direct threat to practical security since noise-
induced errors in QOTP operations and key updates de-
grade decryption accuracy, undermining the guarantee
of reliable encrypted computation on noisy hardware.

TABLE I: AUX-QHE Simulation Performance: Fidelity, Key Complexity, and Timing
A. Correctness
B. Key & Auxiliary Complexity
C. Timing (s)
Config
F
Aux States
Layer Sizes
Cross Terms
Efficiency
Aux Prep
T-Gadget
Decrypt
Total
5q-2t
1.0000
575
10, 105
45
287.5
0.009
0.001
0.032
0.042
4q-3t
1.0000
10776
8, 68, 2618
2306
3592.0
0.183
0.013
0.031
0.228
5q-3t
1.0000
31025
10, 105, 6090
5505
10341.7
0.597
0.036
0.032
0.664
TABLE II: Hardware Fidelity (F-score) Across Config-
urations and Optimisation Methods on IBM Quantum
Method
5q-2t
4q-3t
5q-3t
Baseline
0.3569
0.1222
0.1199
ZNE
0.3296
0.1162
0.1175
Opt-3
0.3618
0.1165
0.1293
Opt-3+ZNE
0.3782
0.1145
0.1305
Opt-3: IBM Qiskit transpiler optimisation level 3.
ZNE: Zero-Noise Extrapolation.
B. Error Mitigation and Future Directions
The combined error mitigation method (ZNE + Opt-
3) offers improved fidelity over standalone methods
across most configurations, though at 4q-3t, all miti-
gation methods underperform the baseline, indicating
that mitigation overhead can itself introduce additional
noise at higher T-depths. While QEM provides the
only currently viable approach for improving QHE
performance on NISQ hardware, it alone cannot guar-
antee the accuracy levels required for secure encrypted
computation. In the long term, integrating QEC will
be essential to bridge the gap between theoretical and
practical QHE security, though this remains infeasible
until hardware scales beyond current NISQ limita-
tions. Additionally, reducing auxiliary overhead through
state reuse mechanisms and T-gadget compression
techniques [18] represents a critical pathway toward
scalable AUX-QHE implementations.
VI. CONCLUSION
We present the first implementation of the FHE-
AUX-QHE framework on real quantum hardware,
demonstrating its practical viability and identifying
critical performance bottlenecks. Our results reveal that
the exponential auxiliary-state increase is the primary
barrier to scalability, with the 5q-3t configuration
reaching 31,025 auxiliary states and 5,505 cross-terms.
Hardware fidelities (F=0.12–0.38) exhibit significant
noise degradation relative to the ideal simulation
(F=1.0), although combined error mitigation (Opt-
3+ZNE) yields consistent improvements. These results
establish concrete resource thresholds for AUX-QHE
deployment on NISQ devices and motivate future work
on auxiliary-state optimisation and QEC integration for
secure quantum cloud computing.