Cryptanalysis of the Sharafi–Daghigh digital
signature scheme
Nour-eddine Rahmani1*, Taoufik Serraj1† and Abdelmalek Azizi1,2†
1*ACSA Laboratory, Departement of mathematics, Faculty of Sciences,
Mohammed I University, BV Mohammed VI, Oujda, 60000, Oriental,
Morocco.
2SupMTI, 67, Immeuble Hallou, Boulevard Med V, Oujda, 60000,
Oriental, Morrocco.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): nour-eddine.rahmani@ump.ac.ma;
Contributing authors: t.serraj@ump.ac.ma; a.azizi@ump.ac.ma;
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
This paper is devoted to the study of the Ring-LWE-based digital signature
scheme proposed by Sharafi and Daghigh, especially, the cryptanalysis of this
scheme. The Sharafi and Daghigh’s scheme is inspired by the Lindner–Peikert
encryption paradigm and adopts a hash-and-sign approach via the Fiat–Shamir
transformation. The security claims rely on the assumed hardness of the Ring-
LWE and Ring-SIS problems, whose definitions and properties are well studied
in last two decades. We demonstrate that this scheme is not secure and generalise
our analysis to the analogous scheme in the plain-LWE setting.
Keywords: LWE, SIS, Digital Signature, Cryptanalysis, Quantum Safe
1 Introduction
The impending threat of quantum computing [1–3] has made it necessary to move
from traditional to post-quantum cryptographic methods. Among the various pos-
sible new families, lattice-based cryptography has attracted much attention because
of its strong worst-case hardness promises and flexibility in algorithmic use cases.
1

In this field, the Learning With Errors (LWE) problem [4] and its ring-based exten-
sion, Ring-LWE [5, 6], are primitive hardness assumptions that form the foundation
for numerous contemporary constructions. Lattice-based cryptography has shown a
promising alternative to classical public-key constructions with further applications,
like Fully-Homomorphic Encryption (FHE), constructing privacy-preserving systems
and much more. NIST has standardized two lattice-based constructions, namely Kyber
[7] and Dilithium [8], their standardized version are ML-KEM [9] and [10] respectively.
In this paper, we focus on the detailed analysis and breakdown of a Ring-LWE-
based digital signature scheme, proposed by Sharafi and Daghigh [11], inspired from
the Lindner- Peikert cryptosystem. The scheme is in the hash-and-sign paradigm with
the Fiat-Shamir transformation, providing efficiency and compactness. With the use of
structured lattices via cyclotomic number fields, it is key and signature size-reducing
while it is conjectured of being quantum-resistant in the Quantum Random Oracle
Model (QROM). The main contribution of this paper has been to introduce a flaw-
by-design attack that compromises unforgeability of the scheme in chosen-message
settings. Rather than depending on inconsistent choice of parameters, the noise dis-
tributions, or simply Fiat-Shamir transform, this attack takes advantage of a more
profound issue: the signing algorithm lacks enough algebraic binds to the secret key.
As a result, an adversary having access only to a public key can easily compute valid
signatures for any input message–thus compromising even the most fundamental ideals
of public-key-only attack security, and consequently, also that of the UF-CMA notion.
We also show that this same vulnerability persists in the plain setting, therefore the
same attack can be adapted to module variant, the generalization of the scheme, where
the base ring is replaced by Rk
q . The attack carries over component-wise, meaning
that this vulnerability is not a coincidence but a deep-seated part of the fundamental
design paradigm. Since the underlying signature scheme has a vulnerability to forgery
when either its private key or an oracle is missing, no remedial actions are suggested.
The purpose of this paper is to clarify and systematically record this intrinsic weakness
through theory as well as through experimental evidence.
We begin by providing the mathematical and algorithmic prerequisites to under-
stand the scheme and our proposed attack in section 2. We then restate the signature
scheme proposed by Sharafi and Daghigh in section 3, its correctness and verification,
and deconstruct its security reduction in section 4. A proof of concept implementation
of the scheme and our attack is given in the section 5. Lastly, a conclusion is given in
section 7.
2 Preliminaries
In this section we revisit some lattice basics and lattice hard problems that most of
lattice-based cryptography relies on.
Definition 1 A lattice L formally is a discrete subgroup of Rn for a norm ∥· ∥. A lattice
can be represented by a basis B = {b1, . . . , bm}, for bi ∈Rn.
2

It is known that, for every lattice L, there is a non-zero vector in L of minimal
euclidean norm, and finding such a vector is the well-known problem of the shortest
vector problem.
Definition 2 Shortest vector problem (SVP) The shortest vector problem is given: B ∈
Zn×m, to find: z ∈Zm \ {0}, such that ∥Bz∥has minimal length.
Notably, lattice bases are not unique; any unimodular transformation preserves the
lattice structure [5]. The quality of a lattice basis it measure on how near orthogonal
and shorter the basis vectors are.
The process of transforming an initial lattice basis into one with improved geomet-
ric properties, termed lattice reduction [12, 13], employs various algorithmic strategies
that trade computational efficiency for output quality. For instance, the LLL algorithm
[12] achieves polynomial-time complexity but yields vectors with exponential approx-
imation factors relative to the shortest vector. In contrast, HKZ reduction guarantees
a basis containing the shortest non-zero vector, albeit at the cost of exponential run-
time. A detailed comparison of these methods and their trade-offs can be found in
the survey [14] and the recent preprint survey [15]. Notably, advancements in lattice
reduction remain an active research area, with recent breakthroughs such as the Pro-
gressive BKZ framework [16] and highly optimized implementations like the General
Sieve Kernel (G6K) [17] pushing the boundaries of practical efficiency.
For more details and discussion of the hardness of the above problems, we refer
the reader to [4, 14].
2.1 Lattice-Based Cryptography
Lattice-based cryptography has emerged as a cornerstone of post-quantum secu-
rity due to its resilience against quantum algorithms. The foundational work by
Ajtai [18] established a critical link between average-case and worst-case hardness of
lattice problems, enabling cryptographic constructions based on robust computational
assumptions.
2.2 Learning With Errors (LWE)
The Learning With Errors (LWE) problem, introduced by Regev [4], underpins many
lattice-based schemes. Let χ be an error distribution over Zq. For a secret s ∈Zn
q , the
LWE distribution As,χ generates samples (a, b) ∈Zn
q ×Zq, where b = ⟨s, a⟩+e mod q
with e ←χ. Two variants exist:
• Search-LWE: Recover s given polynomially many samples.
• Decision-LWE: Distinguish LWE samples from uniform ones.
LWE’s security relies on the conjectured intractability of solving noisy linear equations.
3

2.3 Ring-LWE
To improve efficiency, Lyubashevsky et al. [6] proposed Ring-LWE, an algebraic variant
operating over polynomial rings. Let R = Z[X]/⟨f(X)⟩for a cyclotomic polynomial
f(X) = Xn + 1 (typically n a power of 2) and Rq = R/qR. For a secret s ∈Rq, a
Ring-LWE sample (a, b) ∈Rq × Rq satisfies b = s · a + e mod q, where e ←χ. The
decision variant requires distinguishing such samples from uniform pairs. Cyclotomic
rings are preferred due to their algebraic structure and proven hardness guarantees [6].
2.4 Short Integer Solution (SIS) and Ring-SIS
The SIS problem, introduced by Ajtai [18], involves finding a short non-zero vector
z ∈Zm - i.e. for a small β > 0 find z ∈Zm such that ∥z∥≤β - such that Az = 0
mod q for a random matrix A ∈Zn×m
q
. Its ring analogue, Ring-SIS [5, 6], operates over
Rq: given a = (a1, . . . , am) ∈Rm
q , find z ∈Rm with ∥z∥≤β satisfying Pm
i=1 aizi = 0
mod q for a small β > 0. Both problems are reducible to worst-case lattice problems,
forming the basis for collision-resistant hash functions and digital signatures.
3 Review of the Proposed Digital Signature Scheme
Most of the content of this section is from the original paper of Sharif and Daghigh,
we recall the most related part to our attack from their paper, we refer the reader to
their original paper for further explanations [11]. The signature scheme under study is
built upon the Ring-LWE assumption and inspired by the Lindner–Peikert encryption
system. It follows a “hash-and-sign” paradigm using the Fiat–Shamir transformation
and operates over a cyclotomic ring R = Z[X]/(Xn+1) where n is a power of two. Let
Rq = R/qR for a modulus q. The encoding and decoding mechanisms play a critical
role in the correctness and security of the scheme.
3.1 Digital signature syntax and security notion (UF-CMA)
A digital signature scheme is a triple of probabilistic polynomial-time algorithms
(KeyGen, Sign, Verify) where KeyGen(1λ) outputs a key pair (pk, sk), Sign(sk, m) out-
puts a signature σ, and Verify(pk, m, σ) ∈{accept, reject}. Correctness requires that
for all messages m, Pr[Verify(pk, m, Sign(sk, m)) = accept] = 1 −o(1). Unforgeability
under chosen-message attack (UF-CMA) is defined by the standard game in which an
adversary given pk and access to a signing oracle must not output a valid signature
on a fresh message with non-negligible probability.
3.2 Encoding and decoding: domain, range, and tolerance
Let Σ denote the message space (bitstrings of appropriate length in the original
proposal). The scheme uses deterministic maps
encode : Σ →Rq,
decode : Rq →Σ,
4

where Rq = R/qR. They satisfy an error-tolerance property: there exists a threshold
t such that for all m ∈Σ and all errors e with ∥e∥∞≤t,
decode(encode(m) + e) = m.
In [11], the decoding threshold is set to t = ⌊q/4⌋.
3.3 Key Generation
The signer samples two secret elements r1, r2 ←χk from a discrete Gaussian distri-
bution χk over Rq, and a public element a ∈Rq is sampled uniformly at random. The
public key is computed as:
p = r1 −ar2 ∈Rq.
Algorithm 1 Key Generation
1: Input: Ring Rq, error distribution χk
2: Sample r1, r2 ←χk
3: Sample a ←Rq uniformly
4: Compute p = r1 −ar2
5: Output: Public key (a, p), Secret key r2
3.4 Signing procedure
Given a message m ∈{0, 1}n, the signer hashes it and encodes it as
¯m
=
encode(H(m)) ∈Rq, using an injective encoding function. The signer samples
ephemeral noise terms ei ←χe for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 and computes:
C1 = pe1 + e2, C2
= pae1 + e3 + ¯m, C3 = ae2 + e4
Then, the signer computes:
ω = decode(ar2e1),
h = H(m ∥H(ω)).
The signature is the tuple (C1, C2, C3, h).
Algorithm 2 Signing
1: Input: Message m, secret key r2, public parameters (a, p)
2: Sample e1, e2, e3, e4 ←χe
3: Compute ¯m ←encode(H(m))
4: Compute:
C1 = pe1 + e2, C2 = pae1 + e3 + ¯m, C3 = ae2 + e4
5: Compute ω ←decode(ar2e1)
6: Compute h ←H(m ∥H(ω))
7: Output: Signature (C1, C2, C3, h)
5

3.5 Verification procedure
Given a message m and a signature (C1, C2, C3, h), the verifier computes:
¯m = encode(H(m)),
and checks the following two conditions:
1. decode(C2 −aC1 + C3) = ¯m,
2. h
?= H(m ∥H(decode(−C1))).
Algorithm 3 Verification
1: Input: Message m, signature (C1, C2, C3, h), public key (a, p)
2: Compute ¯m ←encode(H(m))
3: Compute ω′ ←decode(−C1)
4: Compute h′ ←H(m ∥H(ω′))
5: Check:
(i)
decode(C2 −aC1 + C3)
?= ¯m
(ii)
h′ ?= h
6: Accept if both conditions hold; otherwise Reject
Remark 1 (On H(m ∥H(ω)) vs H(m ∥ω)) The original construction computes the Fiat–
Shamir challenge as h ←H(m ∥H(ω)). Using H(ω) provides a fixed-length, canonical input
to the hash function and avoids serialisation ambiguities. This choice does not affect our
cryptanalysis: in a forgery, the adversary can compute ω′ = decode(−C1) from its own C1
and hence can compute H(m ∥H(ω′)) just as the verifier does.
3.6 Design Choices: Encoding, Error Distribution, and Noise
Thresholds
The encode/decode functions are designed such that:
decode(encode(m) + e) = m
for all m ∈{0, 1}n and “small enough” noise e in Rq. The error terms are sampled from
discrete Gaussian distributions χk (for secrets) and χe (for ephemeral randomness)
centered at zero. The success of decoding (i.e., correctness of verification) is guaranteed
with high probability provided the noise remains below a threshold t =
 q
4

.
These choices aim to balance correctness and security. However, as we demonstrate
in the next section, the tight coupling of noise-dependent correctness and Fiat–Shamir
commitments creates a critical structural vulnerability.
6

4 Cryptanalysis: A Flaw-by-Design Attack
4.1 Description of the Attack
The attack we present is not based on solving any underlying hard lattice problem such
as Ring-LWE or Ring-SIS. Instead, it is a structural attack that exploits the algebraic
relationships within the signature generation and verification process. It allows an
adversary to generate valid signatures on arbitrary messages without querying the
signer, thus violating unforgeability in a catastrophic way.
Our attack replicates the structure of a valid signature without access to the secret
key. The adversary proceeds as follows:
1. Choose an arbitrary message m ∈{0, 1}n and define ¯m = encode(H(m)).
2. Sample e1, e2, e3, e4 ←χe from the same small-error distribution used by the signer.
3. Compute the following components:
C1 = pe1 + e2, C2 = pae1 + e3 + ¯m, C3 = ae2 + e4.
4. Instead of compute ω as the signer, the adversary computes directly ω
=
decode(−C1).
5. compute h = H(m ∥H(ω)).
The forged signature (C1, C2, C3, h) passes verification, because:
C2 −aC1 + C3 = (pae1 + e3 + ¯m) −a(pe1 + e2) + ae2 + e4
= (pae1 −ape1) + e3 + ¯m + e4 = ¯m + (e3 + e4).
Since e3 + e4 is small with high probability, the decoding succeeds:
decode(C2 −aC1 + C3) = ¯m.
Thus, the signature is accepted by the verifier, even though the message was never
signed by the legitimate party.
4.2 Proof of Insecurity
We now formally prove that the scheme fails to satisfy the unforgeability under chosen-
message attacks (UF-CMA) requirement. Specifically, we show that a probabilistic
polynomial-time adversary can generate a valid signature on an arbitrary message
without querying the signing oracle.
Theorem 1 The Ring-LWE-based signature scheme of Sharafi and Daghigh is insecure in
the UF-CMA model. There exists a polynomial-time adversary that can forge signatures on
arbitrary messages with overwhelming probability.
Proof Let A be an adversary who does not make any signing queries. On input the public
key (a, p), A a message m ∈{0, 1}n to be signed. A computes ¯m = encode(H(m)). Then it
7

samples e1, e2, e3, e4 ←χe, and computes:
C1 = pe1 + e2, C2 = pae1 + e3 + ¯m, C3 = ae2 + e4.
A checks whether decode(C2 −aC1 + C3) equals m or not, if not, A repeats from step 2.
This loop always finish with high probability due to the fact e3 + e4 is small with high
probability and hence the value C2 −aC1 +C3 is decoded to m. Now the adversary computes
ω = decode(−C1). Finally, A outputs the signature (C1, C2, C3, h) where h = H(m ∥H(ω)).
This signature passes verification because:
decode(C2 −aC1 + C3) = decode( ¯m + e3 + e4) = m,
with high probability, provided that the sum e3 +e4 lies within the decoding radius. Since all
elements involved are small by design, this condition is met with overwhelming probability.
The second condition is valid by constructions since ω = decode(−C1), and therefore the
verifier will find the recompute h′ equals to h in the given signature. As conclusion, the
adversary succeeds in forging a signature on a new message without given any valid signature,
nor the private key to sign, which violates the UF-CMA security definition.
□
5 Experimental Proof of Concept
To confirm the viability of the attack in practice, we implemented a prototype of the
signature scheme and the flaw-by-design forgery algorithm (Algorithm 4) in SageMath.
The primary goal was to demonstrate that for any chosen message, it is possible to
generate a valid signature that passes verification without access to the private key.
Algorithm 4 Flaw-by-Design Forgery Attack
Require: Public key (a, p), m the message to be signed, decoding function decode,
error distribution χe
Ensure: Forged signature (C1, C2, C3, h) on a message m ∈{0, 1}n
1: Compute ¯m ←encode(H(m))
2: Sample e1, e2, e3, e4 ←χe
3: Compute C1 ←pe1 + e2
4: Compute C2 ←pae1 + e3 + ¯m
5: Compute C3 ←ae2 + e4
6: Compute h ←H(m ∥H(decode(−C1)))
7: return (C1, C2, C3, h)
Experimental platform
All experiments were conducted on a single machine with the following specifications:
CPU
Intel Core i7-class processor
RAM
16 GB
OS
Ubuntu 22.04 LTS (64-bit)
SageMath
9.6
Python
3.10
Reported runtimes correspond to average wall-clock time over the stated trials.
8

Setup
We used the parameter set recommended in the original proposal:
• Ring dimension: n = 256
• Modulus: q = 7681
• Error distribution: centered discrete Gaussian χe with standard deviation σ = 2.5
• Decoding threshold: t =
 q
4

= 1920
We generated public keys using the original scheme key generation algorithm, but
all signatures were produced independently using the attack using only the public key
and a random message as inputs.
Procedure
For each of 1000 randomly selected messages:
1. We computed ¯m = encode(H(m)).
2. Sampled noise vectors e1, e2, e3, e4 ←χe.
3. Computed (C1, C2, C3) using the public key and the formulas of the attack.
4. Checked whether decode(C2 −aC1 + C3) = m.
Code availability
A fully reproducible proof-of-concept implementation of the attack is provided as sup-
plementary material in the notebook: https://github.com/ndrahmani/attack sharafi
daghigh.
Results
Our experiments show that the forged signature passes the decoding check with a high
success rate . In rare cases where the decode fails, re-sampling the error terms until
the procedure succeed. The entire forgery process requires less than 10ms per message
on a standard laptop.
These results confirm that the attack is not merely theoretical but also practical
and efficient. It does not rely on any oracle access, nor does it attempt to recover the
secret key. Instead, it forges valid signatures by exploiting the deterministic algebraic
structure of the scheme.
Interpretation
The experimental findings corroborate the theoretical proof of insecurity: the attacker
can produce an arbitrary number of valid signatures on any messages of their choosing.
Since the verification condition only relies on smallness of the decoding error, and the
error is attacker-controlled, the correctness mechanism becomes a source of forgery
rather than security.
This proves that the signature scheme is not only mathematically broken but also
practically able to forge in real-world settings.
9

6 Extended Cryptanalysis to the plain and Module
Variants
The structural vulnerability extends naturally to the plain-LWE generalization of the
scheme. In the module setting, the ring Rq is replaced by Rk
q, but the encode/de-
code mechanism and the correctness-based verification condition remain essentially
unchanged.
The attack scales component-wise: since each coordinate of the module vector
behaves like an independent instance of the base scheme, an adversary can apply the
same reconstruction logic to each coordinate. In fact, the increased redundancy in
higher-dimensional module structures may make the attack even easier to mount.
Therefore, the paradigm regardless of whether it is instantiated over Ring-LWE,
Module-LWE or even plain-LWE remains fundamentally broken.
7 Conclusion
We have demonstrated key-only attack from a structural flaw in the design of a Ring-
LWE-based digital signature scheme that invalidates its unforgeability, even under
standard hardness assumptions and quantum models. Our attack exploits the fact
that an attacker does not need to know the signing keys to generate valid signatures,
as the generated error terms can be done also by the attacker knowing the verification
key only, since this error terms are not bounded to the secret signing key, then the are
easy to be generated.
The flaw generalizes directly to the plain-LWE setting, suggesting that this design
paradigm is fundamentally unsound for digital signatures. As the attack targets the
protocol structure itself rather than its parametrization, no patch or countermeasure is
suggested. This work reinforces the need to re-evaluate design principles when adapting
encryption primitives to signatures, particularly in the post-quantum setting.
Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.