Incentivizing Geographic Diversity
for Decentralized Systems
Marc Roeschlin1, Evangelos Markakis3,1, Raghav Bhaskar1, and Aggelos Kiayias2,1
1 Input Output firstname.lastname@iohk.io
2 The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
3 Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens, Greece
Abstract. Permissionless Decentralized networks, such as blockchains, are
typified by self-determined participation. Unfortunately, this has resulted in
lack of geographic diversity in several blockchains due to benefits emanating
from network proximity between nodes and the higher availability of comput-
ing infrastructure in certain areas. Lack of diversity in the resulting network
can make it susceptible to geopolitical events, blockchain or cryptocurrency-
adverse law-making, and natural disasters. While there exists a growing body
of work in verifiable localization in distributed systems, very little exists on
mechanisms promoting geographic diversity in distributed systems. Our work
sets out to initiate the study of the incentivization of geographic diversity in
permissionless distributed systems. We design a family of mechanisms that
incentivize network nodes to truthfully declare and diversify their locations.
In particular, we provide a game theoretic analysis to derive the conditions
under which truthful location reporting is an equilibrium. The conditions
relate the offered rewards (for geo-diversity) and the success probability of
the underlying localization protocol to detect falsely claimed locations. Our
proposed mechanisms assume an underlying secure node localization protocol
based solely on round-trip times (RTT) measurements from participants of
the protocol. We initiate a formal model to reason about such localization
protocols and identify network topologies that are ideal for resisting location
spoofing attempts. We evaluate effectiveness of our incentive mechanisms in
different scenarios of node placement and underlying network structure. Our
validation is based on two RTT data sets we use to derive maximal spoofing
distance and attack success rates that adversarial nodes can achieve when
operating alone or in collusion with other nodes.
Keywords: Game theory for security, privacy, and blockchain · Blockchain
applications · Network and distributed system security
1
Introduction
Decentralized systems such as blockchains typically rely on multiple networked nodes
that are connected via the Internet and ensure the immutability and liveness of an
underlying ledger. In Bitcoin [23], a permissionless protocol, the number of block-
producing nodes varies, and generally, anyone can participate in block-production
by running the mining software on suitable equipment. Thus, in the permissionless

2
Roeschlin et al.
setting, node selection is driven only by self-interest without any central coordination.
Furthermore, some proof-of-stake blockchains–even when permissionless–may imple-
ment mechanisms that limit committee sizes, i.e., the number of nodes dedicated
to consensus, block-production, synchronization tasks and data dissemination. For
example, the synchronization committee in Ethereum is fixed to 512 nodes [12], and
Cosmos has 200 active validators [3].
As a result, the protocol may depend on a small set of nodes without any guar-
antees as to where the nodes are located geographically. In permissioned protocols,
on the other hand, the set of nodes running the protocol can be suitably curated
to meet various objectives. These considerations become relevant in terms of the
decentralization of the resulting system.
We argue that a decentralized system should also be decentralized in the geo-
graphical sense. Moreover, the Internet topology does not span the globe in a uniform
manner; hence a set of nodes that is geographically diverse might not result in a
uniform set of occupied vertices on the Internet graph, and vice versa. Geographic
diversity is also often at odds with economical incentives for node operators: a rational
operator aims to reduce the cost for computing power and bandwidth, selecting data
centers in strategic locations with high-speed Internet access. Especially for block
production nodes, a location that is well connected and offers low-latency communica-
tion can make a difference in terms of rewards obtained. Depending on the consensus
mechanism, differences in latency and throughput can lead to block races, where a
node is more likely to be successful in advancing the chain by proposing a new block
if the node is well connected and the generated block reaches the other nodes in time.
Observations in the wild confirm these conjectures, and they show, for example, an ag-
glomeration of nodes around important Internet network hubs, such as Frankfurt [9,8].
A consequence of geographic non-diversity is that geopolitical issues, censorship,
natural disasters, or other events, even if focused on one country or area, can affect
a considerable proportion of a distributed system. Therefore, it would be sensible
for blockchain system communities to strive to make their systems more resilient by
ensuring a degree of geographic dispersal. However, this poses a difficult conundrum:
how to counter network centralization incentives in a way that the system can span
to cover remote and less connected regions where it would be required for operators
to tolerate economically less favorable locations?
Contributions. We address these considerations by presenting a first study of
incentive mechanisms that promote geographic diversity in decentralized systems.
We design a reward scheme for node operators that integrates a geography-based
reward and promotes geographic diversity that is compatible with any underlying
decentralized blockchain system that supports smart contracts.
To ensure that node operators cannot claim a geographic bonus they are not eligible
for, we devise a way for the system to verify node locations. We develop a formal
model to reason about geolocation verification protocols and identify the salient
graph-theoretic properties of the underlying network to facilitate effective verification.
The basis of verification is the fact that communication speeds are upper bounded
in the physical layer and nodes can only spoof their location to be further but not
closer to a verification point that sends ping packets and measures round trip times

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
3
(RTTs). It follows that an appropriately distributed set of nodes can catch deviations
if a node tries to spoof their location.
Given our model, we develop a mechanism that uses RTT measurements to
promote truthful reporting of the operators’ locations. A key feature of the mech-
anism is a distributed location verification algorithm. Using deposits and rewards for
successful completion of the geolocation sub-protocol, we create counter incentives
for nodes that misreport their location. We provide a game-theoretic analysis of
our mechanism, establishing that truthful reporting is a Nash equilibrium. We then
analyze the mechanism in the presence of coalitions of players acting together, and
we derive sufficient conditions for collusion-resistance.
We conclude with simulations using two real-world datasets that provide network
locations and RTT measurements. We determine the maximum spoofing distance
that the system can tolerate in the presence of collusions, for both uniform locations
and targeted node placement. We estimate the probability of detection of malicious
nodes as well as false positive rates in the setting where coalitions of players act
together. Our experiments show the practical relevance of our approach and the
possibility to deploy our mechanism in real-world decentralized systems.
2
Background and Related Work
Our approach is fundamentally based on geolocation and geolocalization on the
Internet. In particular, we focus on delay-based geolocation which, compared to
global positioning systems (GPS), requires neither a specialized radio frequency
infrastructure nor any third party that emits a trusted broadcast signal. It utilizes
the existing network connection and is uniquely suited for the localization of nodes
in a decentralized system, such as block-producing nodes in a blockchain.
Delay-based Location Verification. There are many approaches that measure the
delay a message experiences when traversing the Internet, see, e.g., [24,2,14,16,15,13],
and the survey in [29]. The network delays between a host and so-called landmarks
or anchors with known locations are translated to distances by means of an empirical
speed fit, relying on the assumption that the propagation speed in electrical conduc-
tors and optical cables is reasonably constant. A rough estimate of a packet’s speed
on the Internet is around 66% of the speed of light. Although jitter and routing add
noise, the geographic (Great Circle) distance correlates well with measured delays.
There have been many works on how to map delays to distances more accurately;
see, e.g., [18,25,11,19,20,10].
Regardless of the exact distance calculation, most delay-based geolocation protocols
are largely based on the following main steps:
1. A node makes a location claim (in terms of coordinates) and announces its IP
address (if not already known)
2. The landmarks/anchors conduct a series of measurements involving the IP address
of the node in question. Often, landmarks probe the node by sending one or more
pings and record the time the request was sent alongside the arrival time of the
response.

4
Roeschlin et al.
3. Approximate distances are computed based on the delays, which in turn are
calculated from the transmission and arrival times of the messages
4. The distances obtained are used in trilateration/multilateration to determine the
unknown position or area of the node.
5. If the unknown position is “close enough” to the claimed location or area, the
location claim is verified.
Distance Manipulation Attacks. Most delay-based geolocalization mechanisms
are vulnerable to distance manipulation that can lead to location misreporting and
spoofing [1]. If geolocalization is based on standard ICMP utilities, an adversary can
misrepresent their location by affecting the creation and parsing of ICMP packets [1]
where sender and responder can independently and almost arbitrarily shorten or
increase measured round-trip times (RTTs). Paired with the ability to precompute
hypothetical delays between landmarks and the contrived location, an adversary can
spoof their location to the desired coordinates by delaying or advancing the respective
ping measurements.
Security of RTT Measurements and Secure Positioning. Standard ICMP
and TCP pinging methods do not feature cryptographic linking of the request with
the response, and thus distance manipulation is feasible. The initiator of a ping
measurement can encode an arbitrary timestamp for transmission of the ping, and
therefore the correctness of the transmission time cannot be verified. This extends to
the reception (and transmission time) at the responder. It is impossible to determine
whether the responding node delayed or sent the response prematurely. A way to turn
RTT measurements into a distance-bounding-like protocol is to introduce a nonce in
the variable-length data field of the ping to ensure that the request cannot be deflated4,
and thus an adversary cannot fake a shorter distance [17] (inflating is still feasible).
We consider this more secure variant of RTT measurements which is applicable
provided that the responder is restricted to a single position, i.e., cryptographic
material is not shared across multiple locations. Prior work in [6] investigates the
more general problem of secure positioning in the presence of a distributed malicious
prover; however, it does not address the case of dishonest or colluding verifiers, which
is a fundamental concern in decentralized settings.
Geometric Constraints. Constraint-based geolocation (CBG) [14] transforms delay
measurements to distance constraints and uses multilateration to infer the location of
the target host. The feasible area for the location estimate is formed by calculating the
intersection of k circles that are centered around each of the k landmarks, where the
circles themselves are defined by the radii that correspond to the maximum possible
distance between the target host and the respective landmark. A modification of
this technique is used in [17] and [26] to compute the confidence area of a location
estimate. A more general framework for contraint-based localization is presented
in [28], which determines the estimated target location as a region bounded by a set
of Bézier curves allowing for positive and negative constraints.
Decentralization. As CBG [14] and Octant [28] rely on trusted landmarks, it is
uncertain whether such schemes can find adoption in a decentralized context. The
4 To rule out man-in-the-middle attacks, the nonce can be used as part of a challenge-response type
mechanism; e.g., the responding node must apply a keyed hash function to the nonce.

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
5
first approach to extend delay-based geolocation to a fully decentralized setup is
Verloc in [17], which performs measurements with a randomly chosen subset of nodes
acting as challengers instead of predefined landmarks. Using distributed and verifiable
randomness (VRF), VerLoc derives symmetric measurement sets for every node. After
a series of ping messages, every node announces their measured RTTs on a blockchain.
Each node can access the entire set of measured RTTs and verify the location claims
of other nodes by running Newton gradient descent on a coordinate grid based on
the latencies posted on-chain. If the claimed location of a node is statistically close
to the estimated location, the claim is verified. BFT-PoLoc [26] presents a similar
approach, but splits the process into a proof-of-internet-geometry mechanism and
a proof-of-location protocol. The proof-of-internet-geometry mechanism calibrates
the delay-to-distance mapping for every challenger in a Byzantine fortified manner
before the target location is verified by probing it with ping requests. None of these
works deal with the issue of incentivizing geographic diversity.
Game-theoretic Approaches. Although not directly related, the work in [4] is
conceptually interesting, as it presents security games for node localization through
verifiable multilateration in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). The authors define the
properties of verifiable multilateration as a non-cooperative two-player game where
one player places the verifiers in the monitored area and the other player controls
a malicious node. While the first player’s goal is to accurately locate any (malicious)
node, the second player tries to evade localization and possibly report false locations.
The paper in [22] also considers a game-theoretic view, but differs from our work as
the focus is on verifying the location of a single source, by appropriately incentivizing a
set of observers. The authors analyze proof-of-location as a signal network application
and define a notion called source identifiability, which is a necessary condition for
the existence of a mechanism where truthful signal reporting is a strict equilibrium.
Interestingly, their analysis shows that the geometric constraints of localization in
a two-dimensional plane imply that the source’s location can be truthfully elicited
only if it lies inside the convex hull of the observers.
3
Distributed Location Verification – A Formal Model
We now present our framework for secure node localization in network graphs based
on secure RTT measurements. We model the network where we wish to run the
localization protocol as a weighted graph where the edge weight represents the latency
(‘true’ RTT) between the two nodes. A participant in the localization protocol can
at best be ‘localized’ to one of the nodes of this graph. While an honest participant
in the localization protocol will claim the closest node of the graph as its location, a
malicious participant may claim any node as its location. The goal of the localization
protocol is to detect malicious claims based on RTTs reported by all the participating
nodes. Note that in the framework presented here, we assume at most one dishonest
node. In Sections 4 and 5, we discuss incentive-based extensions for the case of
multiple malicious nodes, who may collude with each other. Extending the formal
model presented in this section to the collusion case remains an open problem.

6
Roeschlin et al.
Our graph-based modeling of the network differs from existing approaches in liter-
ature, where nodes can claim a set of coordinates as their location. A key motivation
for doing this is to be agnostic to the underlying RTT measurement procedure and
thus to be widely applicable. Another goal is to study the possible connection of the
localization problem with the rich literature of graph-theory. In fact, we establish an
important connection between the Geodetic set of a graph [5,7] and the maximum
distance that a malicious node can spoof its location by (discussed later). For a more
detailed comparison between coordinate-based and our graph-theoretic approach, we
refer the reader to Appendix C.
Network Graph. We start with a weighted and undirected graph G=(V,E) that
represents the entire network. The weights represent latencies or distances. We assume
that latencies are bidirectional. V represents all possible vertices/locations where a
node can be located. A ⊆V represents the nodes participating in the localization
protocol. A is a non-empty subset of V with cardinality at least 2. Ai=A\{i} is the
set of nodes that measure RTTs to node i∈A, i.e., the reference set of node i. If the
system is comprised of n nodes in total, then ∥A∥=n and we assume ∥A̸=i∥=n−1,
i.e., no two nodes are ever at the same vertex.
(δ,A)-further-off Relation. We now present a simple characterization for a partic-
ipant in any RTT based localization protocol to successfully claim a location other
than its true location (i.e. to spoof a location) in a given network graph G. The idea is
simple: a participant (on her own) can only delay RTTs reported by other participants
but cannot shorten them. Thus, if A is the set of participants reporting RTTs to
i∈V \A, then node i can spoof a location j∈V \A if each participant in A is at some
location k such that the RTT between i and k is already smaller (or equal to) than the
RTT between each j and k. Thus, there is no need for i to have to shorten any RTT
measured to it by others. In such as case, we say that node location j is further-off from
i and can be spoofed by i. We capture this formally by defining a further-off relation.
In all this, we assume no collusion between the participants of the localization protocol.
Notation. In a graph G=(V,E), the length of the shortest path between vertices
i,j∈V is denoted by d(i,j)∈R≥0. It holds that d(i,j)=d(j,i), and d(i,j)>0 if i̸=j, and
d(i,i)=0. Also, for any three vertices i, j and w, it holds that d(i,j)≤d(i,w)+d(w,j).
Definition. The (δ,A)-further-off relation denoted ⪯δ
A is parametrized on set A⊆V
and distance δ∈R≥0. Any vertex j∈V \A is (δ,A)-further off from vertex i∈V \A iff
i⪯δ
Aj : d(i,k)≤d(j,k) ∧d(i,j)≥δ
∀k∈A
Here we have put the additional constraint that j is at least δ away from i,
signifying that the further-off is interesting when node i spoofs a location j at least
δ away, as spoofing to very nearby locations is trivial.
(A,δ)-Geostable Graph. Using the notion of the further-off relation as defined
above, we describe our ideal graph, which we call a Geostable graph. Essentially a
given graph G is (A,δ)-Geostable for a set of participants A with parameter δ, if for
any new participant i∈V \A, there is always a participant k∈A which is ‘closer’ to
any ‘spoofing’ location j∈V \A than i. Here as before, the spoofing location j is at

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
7
least ‘distance’ δ away from i. Thus, no i,j∈V \A, are in a (δ,A)-further-off relation,
i.e., ∀i,j∈V \A
i̸=j
¬
 i⪯δ
Aj

, which is equivalent to
∀i,j∈V \A
i̸=j
∃k∈A [d(i,k)>d(j,k)∨d(i,j)<δ]=∀
i,j∈V \A
i̸=j ∧d(i,j)≥δ
∃k∈A d(i,k)>d(j,k)
Definition. A graph G=(V,E) is (A,δ)-Geostable (with respect to set A) iff
∀
i,j∈V \A
i̸=j ∧d(i,j)≥δ
∃k∈A d(i,k)>d(j,k)
Thus the notion of Geostability tells us that if we can find a set A⊆V in a graph G,
such that no node in V \A is in a (δ,A)-further-off relation with j∈V \A, then no node
can spoof its location to a node location greater than (or equal to) δ away. This is so
because a simple algorithm that looks at mismatches between the reported RTTs and
the graph weights, can detect the spoofing attempt. Note the δ (we call it the maximum
spoofing distance) in the above definition is for the case when the spoofing node is on
its own (no collusion with any other node). Later in Section 5 we present an algorithm
to compute the maximum spoofing distance when upto t nodes may be colluding and
the localization algorithm is more relaxed, in the sense, that it allows upto a threshold
number of mismatches (k) between the reported RTTs and the graph weights. Also,
note that the Geostability notion does not consider any latency variation in the network.
But since δ is the maximum spoofing distance, reasonable jitter is unlikely to impact it
(we show experiments in Appendix G to establish this). Further, due to lack of space, we
show in appendix A, an interesting connection between Geostability and the (strong)
Geodetic set of a graph. In particular, we show that if the set of nodes participating in
the localization protocol (A) are located at the Geodetic set locations of the graph, no
node can spoof its location to any other node in V \A. As mentioned earlier, extending
the above notions and definitions to the case of collusion is an open problem, but
we present an incentive-based approach to handle collusion in the following section.
4
Generic Model of Games for Truthful Reporting and
Geo-diversity
In this section, we develop a game-theoretic framework to prevent spoofing in dis-
tributed localisation protocols, even when a set of participating nodes may be colluding.
We present a simple and abstract model that can serve as a starting point for studying
rewards and incentives when it comes to promoting geo diversity and to discouraging
users from trying to spoof their location.
A 2-tier Reward System. The simplest possible reward scheme that a system
designer could use would be a tiered system as follows: Tier 1 contains all the operators
who were not caught spoofing their location. In particular, a reward r is given to
these operators for playing honestly. Tier 2 is defined by determining a priori a set
of designated locations where we want to promote further participation of nodes.
Then for every active operator who was not caught spoofing her location, and whose

8
Roeschlin et al.
reported location belongs to the designated regions, she receives an additional amount
g as a geo-dependent bonus.
We note that if we want to make the protocol more budget-efficient, we could set
r=0, i.e., we pay only the operators in the designated regions. Moreover, the operators
also receive rewards from block production. We assume these are not affected by the
game we consider here, i.e., whether they spoof their location or not, they will continue
producing and validating blocks, and hence receiving such rewards. Therefore, we
will not incorporate them in the game of interest here. The game proceeds as follows:
– In Phase 1, the protocol asks all operators to report their location and to also
submit a deposit d≥0.
– In Phase 2, the protocol runs an algorithm to determine whether the operators
are truthful. We treat this as a black box here. This algorithm can possibly ask
for further information from the nodes, such as RTT times.
– If at any point during Phase 1 or Phase 2, a node does not abide by the protocol, i.e.,
does not respond to whatever information the protocol asks, she loses her deposit.
– Finally, in Phase 3, the protocol issues payments as follows: Anyone who was
caught lying does not receive any payment. All other players receive back the
deposit d and a reward r. Among these players, the operators who are in designated
regions also receive the extra geographic bonus, g.
Strategy Space. At this level of description, we abstract away all the possible moves
of a player (which also depend on how exactly Phase 2 is implemented) and we view
this as a standard normal-form game, where each player has to decide independently
of the other players, among 2 actions: either she can decide to play honestly (denoted
by H), meaning that she reports truthfully and makes no attempt to fake her location,
or she can try to deviate, misreport and/or cheat on her claimed location (denoted
by C). Technically, cheating can occur in many ways depending on how the protocol
tries to verify the locations, but we feel it is insightful to start with this binary choice
for now. The motive for cheating here is to pretend that a node belongs to one of
the designated regions so as to receive the additional bonus of g. In Section 4.1, we
also discuss the possibility of collusions among players.
In order to analyze any verification protocol in line with the above model, we
define first some relevant parameters. Fix a player i, and let x be a strategy profile
for the other players, i.e., x contains a strategy choice for all players other than i, x∈
{H,C}n−1, where n is the total number of operators. Given that a verification protocol
is expected to have randomized decisions, we let ps(i,x) be the conditional probability
of i getting caught, when she tries to spoof her location, and given also that the
other operators behave according to x. Analogously, we let ph(i,x) be the conditional
probability of i being marked as dishonest/malicious by the protocol, conditioned that
she abided honestly by the protocol rules and the other operators play x. The latter
can occur when the protocol could produce false positives. Naturally, we can expect
that ph(i,x)<<ps(i,x). Moreover, ph(i,x)=0 if a protocol has no false positives.
The essence of the next theorem is that if we can estimate the probabilities ps(·)
and ph(·) in a given protocol, then we could tune the reward parameters r, g and
the deposit d, so that playing honestly is the most preferable choice for each player.

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
9
Theorem 1. Fix a player i and let x ∈{H,C}n−1 be the strategy profile of the
remaining players. If i is not located in the designated regions, then playing honestly
is better for i than deviating, when the geographic bonus is upper-bounded as follows
g≤ps(i,x)−ph(i,x)
1−ps(i,x)
·(r+d)
Proof. Consider such a player i. When i plays honestly, and the remaining players
play according to x, then her expected payoff is equal to (1−ph(i,x))r+ph(i,x)(−d).
This is so, because i will get her deposit back if she is not marked as dishonest by
the protocol, which occurs with probability 1−ph(i,x). On the other hand, suppose
that such a player i cheats. Then, with probability ps(i,x), she will have a negative
utility of −d, since she will lose her deposit, whereas with the remaining probability
she gets a total gain of r+g. Therefore, her expected utility becomes:
(1−ps(i,x))(r+g)+ps(i,x)(−d)
In order for honest play to be more preferred, we need the expected payoff under the
honest profile to be at least as good as the above formula. Thus, the following needs
to hold: (1−ph(i,x))r+ph(i,x)(−d)≥(1−ps(i,x))(r+g)+ps(i,x)(−d). Simplifying
this leads to the claimed condition in the theorem.
⊓⊔
This allows us to conclude when does honest play form a Nash equilibrium of the
underlying game. Let x∗=(H,H,···,H) be the honest profile, where all n players act
honestly. Following standard notation, and given a player i, let x∗
−i be the strategy
profile of the remaining n−1 players acting honestly.
Corollary 1. The honest profile x∗=(H,H,···,H) is a Nash equilibrium if for every
player i whose real location is in a non-designated region, it holds that
g≤
ps(i,x∗
−i)
1−ps(i,x∗
−i) ·(r+d),
(1)
where ps(i,x∗
−i)) is the probability of i getting caught when all players are acting
honestly.
4.1
Collusion
Coming now to the aspects of collusion, it is conceivable that some operators, say
a set S, could try to form a coalition so that some members of S can attempt to
spoof their location and receive the extra geographic reward bonus g. We can think
of the set S as being decomposed in 2 subsets, S=S1∪S2, where S1 is the subset of
S belonging already to the designated regions and S2 is the subset of S who want to
spoof their location. We will often refer to S2 as the spoofers and to S1 as the helpers.
The reason that S1 may be willing to participate in such a collusion is because the
members of S2 may offer them some compensation from the extra amount that they
will make if they succeed in spoofing their location. Therefore, the members of S1
may take the risk to help (by reporting say false RTT times towards S2), even though
they will not try to spoof their own location. This gives rise to the following definition.

10
Roeschlin et al.
Definition 1. Consider a coalition of operators S. We say that the honest profile
(H,H,...,H) is resilient to a collusion by S, if the total expected utility of S under the
honest profile is at least as big as the total expected utility under deviating.
For simplicity, we will stick to scenarios where only one set of nodes is trying to
collude together and deviate from the protocol in order to gain more profits. Hence,
if S is the set of the colluding players, we will consider that the remaining operators
are behaving honestly. Ideally, to evaluate the resistance of a protocol to such actions,
we would need to estimate the probability that a player gets caught cheating. i.e, we
could define p(i,S), as the probability of player i getting caught when the collusion
set is S, with i∈S, while all other players not in S are being honest. We will provide
here a simpler but coarser analysis, assuming that the relevant probabilities depend
on the cardinalities of the involved sets and not on the identities of its members.
In particular, let S be a set of colluding players, with |S|=t and suppose |S1|=th,
|S2|=ts, so that t=th+ts. We continue our analysis by focusing on two different
scenarios regarding the success of the collusion. The first one is more suitable for
protocols that try to detect deviations by a coalition of players as a whole. The second
one captures protocols that try to detect a deviation per individual.
All-or-nothing Detection. Consider the case where the protocol either catches all
the spoofers of the collusion or not. We let p(t,ts) be the probability that a set of ts
spoofers gets caught, when they form a coalition with t−ts helpers. We assume that
when the collusion is detected by the protocol, it penalizes all the spoofers (who then
lose their deposit) but not the helpers. Thus, we consider a lenient type of protocols
that do not hurt the helpers, given that they do not try to misreport their location.
The subsequent analysis can be adapted easily for the case where the helpers are also
punished.
We can now try to establish some sufficient conditions on the relevant parameters
that could avert collusion.
Theorem 2. The honest profile x∗=(H,H,...,H) is collusion-resistant to a collusion
of size t with ts spoofers, when
g≤
p(t,ts)
1−p(t,ts) ·(r+d)
(2)
Proof. Under the honest profile, the total utility of S is P
i∈Sui(H,H,...,H). For each
member i∈S1, her utility under honest play equals (r+g) with probability 1. For
the members of S2, it equals r. Therefore, by summing up, we have
X
i∈S
ui(H,H,...,H)=(t−ts)(r+g)+tsr
(3)
If the set S deviates, then with probability p(t,ts) the members of S2 lose the
deposit d, and do not get any reward. On the other hand, with probability 1−p(t,ts),
all members of S gain r+g. Hence the expected utility of S would be equal to
t(1−p(t,ts))(r+g)+p(t,ts)[(t−ts)(r+g)−tsd]

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
11
In order for x∗to be collusion resistant, we therefore need the last expression to
be upper bounded by the expected utility of S under honest play. After carrying out
the calculations and some arising simplifications, we obtain the desired inequality.
⊓⊔
Individual Detection. Suppose now that when a set S colludes, the protocol may
identify some of the members as spoofers whereas other members may get away with
it. In this context, we use the term p(t,ts) to denote the probability that each spoofer
gets caught and penalized, when she belongs to a coalition of t members with ts
spoofers, and when all other players are honest. This means that for each spoofer
we have a Bernoulli trial for having her caught. Also, as before, the helpers are not
penalized. We provide an analog of Theorem 2 below, where the conditions now get
more complex due to the counting of the successful Bernoulli trials.
Theorem 3. The honest profile x∗=(H,H,...,H) is collusion-resistant to a collusion
of size t with ts spoofers, when
ts
X
ℓ=0
ts
ℓ

·p(t,ts)ℓ(1−p(t,ts))ts−ℓ[−dℓ+(ts−ℓ)(r+g)]≤rts
(4)
5
Decentralized Localization Game
We now present a decentralized localization game derived from the model proposed in
the previous section. In particular, we use a blockchain smart-contract to play the role
of the Game Organizer (GO), concretize the exact data shared by the operators, the
localization algorithm that is used to detect misbehaving operators (which was treated
as a black box in the previous game analysis), and specify the various strategies
available to the operators.
Game parameters: Internet graph G, the rewards: r, g and the required deposit d.
Also, an upper bound t on the maximum number of colluding nodes in the network
is assumed. The localization algorithm has another tweakable parameter k to man-
age the false positives and false negatives. As a first step, all the game parameters
are published on the blockchain and a smart-contract with the above-mentioned
parameters embedded in it is launched. As before, the game is divided into phases:
– First phase: Operators send their IP address5, a deposit of d≥0 coins as well as a
commitment (hash function based) to their location (instead of outrightly sending in
their location) to the smart contract. Malicious operators may report a location on
the internet graph different from their true location, as well as a different IP address,
but we assume that ping requests to the claimed IP address is responded to by the
operator. Operators can also choose to totally abstain from the game, but they do
not affect our game in any way. Note that the commitment hides the location from
all other operators and also ensures that the participant cannot open (change) it to a
different location later. This way the operators can not adapt their strategy based on
other operators’ locations/actions. As mentioned in Section 4, our analysis is based
on normal-form games, i.e., every operator picks a strategy and then plays the game.
5 For honest operators, IP addresses may correlate with physical location; however, our approach does
not rely on IP-based localization.

12
Roeschlin et al.
Algorithm 1 Localization
Input: Graph G:=(V =[1,n],E={i,j,e[i,j]}
s.t. i,j∈V, e[i,j]≥0∧e[i,j]=e[j,i]),
O⊆V s.t. |O|=m,
RTTs={(i,ipi,rtti[m−1])}i∈O, k
Output: Set: Malicious
Steps:
∀i∈O: count[i]=0; Malicious = {}
for (i∈O,j∈O\{i}) do
if (rtti[j]̸=e[i,j]) or (rttj[i]̸=e[i,j]) then
count[i]++
end if
end for
if ∃i∈O with count[i]≥k then
Malicious←
−Malicious∪{i}
end if
Output Malicious
Algorithm 2 deltafn(i,O,t,k)
Input: G = (V, E), O ⊆V
s.t.
|O|=m, i∈O, t, k
Output: δ
Steps:
δ=0
for a random choice of set S in O\{i}
of size t−1 do
H=O\{S}
for i′∈V \O do
H
′ ←
−{j:j∈H, e[j,i′]<e[j,i]}
if |H
′|<k then
δ=max(δ,d(i,i′))
end if
end for
end for
return δ
– Second phase: All participating nodes read the IP addresses from the smart
contract and then perform the m−1 RTT measurements, and publish them back
to the smart contract as well as send their location (open the commitment) in the
graph. As mentioned earlier, a cheating operator may report arbitrary RTTs to
the various IP addresses.
– Third phase: The smart contract validates that every participant has submitted
the required RTT measurements, and then collects the locations submitted by the
operators. The smart contract then runs the localization algorithm (Algorithm 1)
along with the received location claims (which should match the commitments) to
decide on the malicious nodes and the payments and rewards that are to be made.
• If one or more operators are output as malicious: Forfeit deposit of all malicious
nodes. Return deposits of all other non-malicious nodes along with reward r.
• If the output Malicious set is empty: Each operator gets back the deposit d and
a reward r. Further, operators in designated regions receive additional reward g.
Overview of Algorithm 1. The algorithm takes as input the graph G, the operator
set O of size m, a m−1 array per operator with the measured RTTs and k, which is
the number of RTT mismatches that are considered by the localization algorithm to
detect misbehaving nodes. k can take any value in [1,t+1] 6, with each value resulting
in different false positives and false negatives in misbehaviour detection. For instance,
a value of t+1 ensures zero false positives (high false negatives as well), as no honest
node can have more than t mismatched entries (here we assume that the colluding
nodes are not trying to frame any honest node, rather making modifications to RTTs
to help the colluding nodes avoid detection). A smaller value of k in contrast leads
to lower false negative rates and smaller maximum spoofing distance.
6 As in the previous section, if we assume that ts out of the t colluding nodes to be spoofing their
location, k can take a value in [1,ts+1]

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
13
6
8
10
15
20
25
30
40
Number of players
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Max spoofing distance [*diam]
Data set 1 (132 nodes)
(Coalition size, number of spoofers)
1, 1
3, 1
3, 2
3, 3
6
8
10
15
20
25
30
40
Number of players
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Max spoofing distance [*diam]
Data set 2 (152 nodes)
(Coalition size, number of spoofers)
1, 1
3, 1
3, 2
3, 3
Fig.1: Maximum spoofing distance (given in terms of diamter of G) for varying numbers
of spoofers within a coalition of size 3. Shaded areas indicate the 90% confidence interval.
On the Threshold k.We propose a way for GOs to choose an appropriate value of k.
To this end, the GO can use Algorithm 2 to compute δi,O,t,k which is the maximum
distance any node i∈O can spoof its location by, when the nodes (O\i) are reporting
RTTs to i, at most t−1 of them are in collusion with i, and k is the threshold used
in the localization algorithm. Further δG,O,t,k =maxi∈O deltafn(i,O,t,k). If the value
of δG,O,t,k is considered too high, then an option may be to decrease k. However, as
mentioned before, this also increases the false positive rate.
We further observe that the parameters k and t in Algorithm 1 and 2 constitute
a practical bridge between the idealized graph-based formulation in Section 3 and the
game-theoretic model in Section 4 that describes a realistic setting where collusion
and a limited number of RTT mismatches (k) are allowed. We present some empirical
results around k, t and the false positives in Section 6.
6
Simulations
We present some key insights related to the game postulated in Section 5 using simula-
tions on two data sets that contain RTT measurements between hosts in the Internet.
Data Sets. The first data set comprises 132 hosts forming an overlay network. Since
the network’s architecture and routing are known, the data set includes both RTTs
between nodes and edge weights, where the weights represent average delays for the
corresponding links. This graph structure enables evaluation of the graph-theoretic
aspects discussed in Section 3. The corresponding simulation results are in Appendix E.
The second data set contains 152 hosts with pairwise round-trip time (RTT)
measurements, including minimum, maximum, and average delays. It is provided
by WonderNetwork [27], a global provider of networking services specializing in
performance testing. Both data sets contain the geographic locations of the hosts at
city-level precision, which we show in Appendix D.
Maximum Spoofing Distance under Collusion. We examine the maximum spoof-
ing distance (δ) achievable under collusion, using both data sets and assuming a fixed
coalition size of three. Figure 1 reports values of δG,O,t,k for t=3 and k∈1,2,3. δG,O,t,k
is computed using the function deltafn(i,O,t,k) for all i∈O as defined in Algorithm 2.

14
Roeschlin et al.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Number of spoofers = 1
Number of spoofers = 3
Coalition size = 3
0
2
4
6
8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
4
6
8
Coalition size = 5
Threshold k
Number of players
10
20
30
Metric
Detection Rate
False Positive Rate
Fig.2: p(t,ts) (dotted lines) and ph(t,ts) (solid lines) for varying numbers of players, coalition
size t, and number of spoofers ts, based on data set 2 (152 nodes). Shaded bands represent
the 90% confidence interval. Player locations are sampled uniformly within the convex hull.
As described before, spoofers falsely report their location and are allowed to manip-
ulate both incoming and outgoing RTT measurements to evade detection. Helpers,
by contrast, do not spoof their own location but submit RTTs that favor coalition
members. The results in Figure 1 clearly show that the maximum spoofing distance
increases with the number of spoofers in the coalition. Maintaining zero false positives
requires a higher detection threshold (as discussed in Section 5), which in turn reduces
the sensitivity of the system to spoofing attempts, particularly when multiple dishon-
est players are involved. Compared to the baseline case of a lone spoofer, a coordinated
coalition can significantly extend the range over which spoofing remains undetected.
Probability of Malicious Behavior Detection and False Positives. We present
insights from our incentivization game from Section 5. We measure the probability
that a dishonest player is correctly identified (p(t,ts)) when attempting to spoof their
location, and the probability that an honest player is incorrectly flagged as dishonest
(false positive), ph(t,ts). These metrics are evaluated in various scenarios, including
when dishonest players act alone or as part of a coalition. The trade-off between
p(t,ts) and ph(t,ts) is controlled by the threshold parameter k in the localization
algorithm (Section 5). The results shown here are for data set 2; the results for data
set 1 are similar and can be found in Appendix F.
Figure 2 reveals that increasing k consistently reduces ph(t,ts). In particular,
ph(t,ts) drops to zero once k exceeds the number of spoofers. The “helping” players
within the coalition contribute favorable RTTs but do not perform spoofing themselves
(see Section 4), and therefore do not influence ph(t,ts). However, p(t,ts) decreases with
increasing k. This is because Algorithm 1 requires a higher number of honest players
located near the spoofed position to register enough measurement inconsistencies and
reach the threshold k. The number of both spoofers and helpers affects p(t,ts); the

Incentivizing Geographic Diversity for Decentralized Systems
15
6
10
15
20
30
40
Number of players
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Detection probablity
Data set 2 (152 nodes) | 1000 experiments
Number of spoofers
1
3
5
Coalition size
1
3
5
(a) Varying number of spoofers and coalition sizes
6
10
15
20
30
40
Number of players
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Detection probability
Data set 2 (152 nodes) | 1000 experiments
Player locations
uniform inside CH
random
Helper location strategy
close to target
close to spoofer
random
(b) One spoofer in a coalition of size 5 for different
helper locations
Fig.3: Detection probability (p(t,ts)) for k=t+1, i.e., no false positives. Player locations are
sampled uniformly inside convex hull. Target locations (during spoofing) are randomly chosen.
more dishonest players are present, the greater the likelihood that a spoofing attempt
goes undetected, as the coalition can obscure more RTT mismatches.
Figure 3a shows the average p(t,ts) when the localization algorithm is configured
for low false positives (low ph(t,ts)), enabling collusion resistance as described in
Section 4. We set the threshold k to be the number of spoofers plus one, which
ensures that spoofers are only flagged when a sufficient number of honest players
register inconsistencies. The results in Figure 3a confirm that the p(t,ts) increases
with the number of players because more players result in more measurement paths
and consequently a higher probability of detecting anomalies. Detection becomes
more difficult as the coalition size grows. Larger coalitions provide spoofers with more
support in manipulating RTT measurements, thereby reducing the odds of detection.
A greater number of spoofers further improves the coalitions’ chances of evading
detection as more spoofers introduce a larger number of RTT mismatches, potentially
implicating honest players and lowering the effectiveness of the detection mechanism.
Collusion Strategies. We investigate how the placement of colluding players in-
fluences the detection probability of location spoofing. Rather than assuming that
helpers are selected randomly and without (geographic) awareness, we consider more
strategic adversarial behaviors in which the spoofer chooses helpers located either
near their target location or near their actual location.
Figure 3 presents the average detection probability for these three strategies,
assuming a coalition of five players, with one acting as the spoofer and four as helpers.
The experiments are repeated under two different player location sampling regimes:
random selection and uniform distribution within the convex hull. For instance, the
solid purple line with square markers in Figure 3 shows the detection probability
when player locations are sampled randomly, and the helpers are positioned near the
spoofer’s target location.
A uniform distribution of players improves the detection probability, but more
importantly, there is a decrease in detection probability when helpers are located
close to the target. In this configuration, the helpers can report shorter RTTs that are
consistent with the spoofed location, as their distance to the target is often shorter
than to the spoofer’s actual location. This increases the chances of a successful spoofing

16
Roeschlin et al.
attempt. Conversely, when the helpers are placed near the spoofer’s true location, the
detection probability is largely unaffected. This strategy provides little to no advantage
to the attacker, and p(t,ts) remains comparable to the baseline with random sampling.
Incorporating Jitter and Measurement Noise. Algorithm 1 relies on inequality
conditions to detect mismatches in RTTs. In practice, these inequalities may be
relaxed to account for variability introduced by routing dynamics and network noise.
Our empirical analysis shows that accounting for jitter only has a limited effect on
detection rates. Assuming that 10% of the delay is governed by jitter, detection rates
decrease by less than 5%. The respective figures can be found in Appendix G.
7
Discussion and Conclusion
We adopted a formal approach to analyze the guarantees that distributed geolocation
verification can offer in arbitrary network topologies. We introduced a generic two-tier
reward game model designed to incentivize geographic diversity and presented a
corresponding localization algorithm tailored to meet the requirements for both Nash
equilibrium and collusion resistance. Finally, we evaluated the detection probability
and false positive probabilities, the two central metrics underpinning the feasibility
of equilibrium and collusion resistance, using two real-world data sets.
Possible Extensions. Our study is a starting point for incentivizing geographic diver-
sity. Currently, players face a binary decision (honest/dishonest), but a multi-tiered sys-
tem and a richer strategy space would allow for more nuanced decisions, including mul-
tiple spoofing targets. Furthermore, future work should consider colluding behaviors
where dishonest players undermine honest participants without gaining a direct reward.
Overall, this work advances the theory of distributed location verification and
bridges the gap towards practical applications in real-world networks. By facilitating
more resilient location verification, our mechanism can help mitigate spoofing attacks
and incentivize geographic diversity in distributed systems.