Lattice-based Ring Verifiable Random Functions
Jie Xu1 , Muhammed F. Esgin1 , and Ron Steinfeld1
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia
name.surname@monash.edu
Abstract. Verifiable Random Functions (VRFs) provide publicly ver-
ifiable pseudorandomness uniquely determined by a secret key and an
input. While widely used in decentralized protocols, standard VRF verifi-
cation reveals the signer’s identity, exposing them to targeted adversarial
disruption once their eligibility is known.
We study Ring VRFs (RVRFs), which allow a member of a public key set
(a ring) to publish a VRF value along with a proof of correct generation
while hiding the signer’s index within the set. We formalize an algo-
rithmic RVRF interface that binds the ring into the evaluated input to
prevent cross-ring reuse and ring grinding (i.e., the malicious selection of
a specific ring configuration to manipulate the pseudorandom outcome).
Diverging from existing UC-based treatments, we propose a comprehen-
sive suite of game-based security notions tailored to verifiable random-
ness under anonymity: correctness, anonymity, pseudorandomness, and a
novel corruption-aware uniqueness notion called T-uniqueness. Our main
technical result is a modular compiler that transforms any provable VRF
into an RVRF by proving a one-out-of-many statement for the induced
ring relation. We instantiate the OR layer via an optimized Fiat–Shamir
OR (FS-OR) composition in the random oracle model, where the prover
utilizes prover-side simulation for all non-witness branches and completes
the witness branch only after a global consistency constraint is fixed. Fo-
cusing on post-quantum resilience, we provide concrete instantiations of
our RVRF framework based on two state-of-the-art lattice VRFs: the
long-term lattice VRF LaV by Esgin et al. (Crypto’23) and the few-time
lattice VRF LB-VRF by Esgin et al. (FC’19). We provide a detailed analy-
sis of concrete parameters across various ring sizes for both constructions
and perform a comprehensive side-by-side comparison of their commu-
nication costs and security trade-offs. Our instantiations are modular,
with their security reducing cleanly to (i) the base VRF’s correctness,
pseudorandomness, and per-key uniqueness, and (ii) standard FS-OR
properties (simulatability and extractability).
Keywords: verifiable random functions · ring primitives · one-out-of-
many proofs · post-quantum cryptography · lattices
1
Introduction
Verifiable Random Functions (VRFs), introduced by Micali, Rabin, and Vad-
han [35], provide publicly verifiable pseudorandomness that is deterministically
tied to a secret key and an input. Given a public key pk and an input x, an

evaluator holding the corresponding secret key sk outputs a value v together
with a proof that v is the unique VRF output prescribed for (pk, x), while
any PPT adversary without sk cannot predict v on fresh inputs. Beyond their
original formulation, VRFs have been studied under a variety of constructions
and limitations—including number-theoretic instantiations and lower bounds
on what can be achieved from certain primitives [13, 21, 27, 29]. In practice,
VRFs have become a standard building block for distributed protocols, where
uniqueness/determinism and public verifiability are used to make eligibility or
randomness auditable and non-equivocable.
A central driver for VRF deployment is public leader election and committee
selection in open networks. Prominent examples include Algorand-style crypto-
graphic sortition [9,26], proof-of-stake leader election in the Ouroboros line [11,
30], and randomness beacons / distributed randomness protocols [28,41]. Related
systems motivate verifiable randomness together with privacy constraints, e.g.,
Privacy Pass deployments and their recent cryptographic refinements [12, 19].
Across these settings, the ability to prove correctness of a pseudorandom value
is essential, but so is the ability to withstand adaptive, targeted corruption.
Standard VRF verification is tied to a specific public key, and therefore re-
veals which participant produced an output. In open and adversarial networks,
this linkage can be the primary vulnerability: once eligibility or contribution
becomes known, an adaptive adversary may mount targeted denial-of-service,
censorship, coercion, or bribery before the protocol completes [11,26]. This mo-
tivates an anonymous analogue of VRFs where a party can publish verifiable
randomness while hiding which member of an authorized set evaluated.
We study ring verifiable random functions (ring VRFs, RVRFs), first intro-
duced in the ePrint preprint [6]. A ring is a public list of keys R = (pk1, . . . , pkN).
A ring member holding ski for some pki ∈R evaluates on input x and outputs a
value v and a proof π. Verification should certify that there exists i ∈[N] such
that v is a correct VRF value under pki, while π hides which index was used.
This formulation is consistent with recent work exploring anonymous/ring-style
VRF semantics in different models and application contexts [6,27,42].
Ring grinding and ring binding. Without binding the ring into the input, an
evaluator could compute VRF outputs for the same message x under multiple
rings (or multiple encodings/orderings of the same ring) and selectively publish
the one yielding a favorable value, a form of ring grinding. By defining the
evaluated input as µ := Bind(x, R) := x∥HR(Enc(Canon(R))), where Canon fixes
a canonical representation of the ring R, Enc encodes it unambiguously, and HR
is a (domain-separated) random oracle, we prevent such cross-ring reuse and ring
grinding.
The RVRF interface is designed to be a drop-in replacement for VRFs in
applications where verifiable randomness must coexist with anti-targeting re-
quirements. Correctness ensures an honest ring member can always produce an
accepting output. Anonymity formalizes anti-targeting: verification reveals that
some authorized party evaluated, but not which one. Pseudorandomness cap-
tures unpredictability of v on fresh inputs and, in the VRF setting, implies a nat-
ural fresh-input unforgeability guarantee (Remark 1). Finally, uniqueness must
2

remain meaningful under anonymity. A natural (but overly strong) requirement
would be ring-wide uniqueness, i.e., that for any fixed (R, x) there exists a single
accepting value v. However, this contradicts correctness when keys are generated
independently. For the “member-derived” semantics we target—accepted out-
puts certify v = EvalVRF(ppVRF, ski, µ) for some (hidden) i ∈R—different honest
members may legitimately obtain different accepting outputs on the same (R, x).
Imposing a single ring-wide value would therefore either change the semantics
(making v independent of the member) or exclude natural VRF+OR construc-
tions. We therefore do not require ring-wide uniqueness and instead adopt T-
uniqueness, which captures corruption-limited equivocation: even if the adver-
sary corrupts up to T members, it cannot produce more than T distinct accepting
values for the same (R, x). This notion aligns with system-level guarantees where
each corrupted key corresponds to at most one “identity/pseudonym/eligibility
token” per input, and honest members remain anonymous within the ring. It is
natural that a party holding T of the N public keys in a ring can generate T
different outputs (using a different secret key in each case).
Consider an anonymous access-control or identity layer where users regis-
ter public keys, the system publishes an authenticated digest of the registered
set, and each service instance fixes a public input x (e.g., a URL, domain, or
epoch identifier). A registered user can run RingEval(pp, ski, R, x) and obtain a
value v that acts as a per-service pseudonym, together with a proof π that v
is legitimate for some registered key. Here anonymity protects privacy; pseudo-
randomness avoids biased or linkable identifiers; and T-uniqueness provides a
clean anti-evasion guarantee under bounded compromise: with at most T cor-
ruptions, an adversary cannot generate more than T distinct valid pseudonyms
for the same service input. This avoids external revocation mechanisms such
as time-bounded credentials or privacy revocation by a central authority or an
anonymous committee.
1.1
Comparison with Related Primitives
Table 1 summarizes the relationship between RVRFs and nearby anonymity
primitives, emphasizing VRF-style pseudorandom outputs, ring binding, and
the relevant uniqueness notion.
Relation to ring signatures and unique ring signatures. Ring signatures
and group signatures provide anonymous authentication [4, 8, 38, 39], but they
do not enforce the VRF semantics that are essential in randomness-driven pro-
tocols. In particular, a ring signature authenticates an arbitrary message of the
evaluator’s choice; it does not certify that an attached value is the unique, de-
terministic output of a prescribed algorithm on a fixed input. This distinction
is exactly what prevents “try-many” biasing in leader election and lottery-style
applications. Unique ring signatures (URS)[23, 24, 31] add a per-input unique
tag and thus appear closer to ring VRFs in identity-style use cases, but URS
tags are not designed to be pseudorandom (nor to remain pseudorandom under
adversarially generated keys), and URS does not directly provide the “verifiable
randomness” interface needed when the value itself drives selection thresholds.
3

Table 1: High-level comparison.
Primitive
Anonymity V-PRF Ring Binding Uniqueness Model
PQ
Ring sig. [38,39]/sig.[4,8]
✓
×
×
n/a
varies varies
URS / link tags[23,24,31]
✓
×
×
link
varies varies
Anon. VRF[25,42]
✓
✓
NA
per-key
varies
NA
UC Ring VRF[6]
✓
✓
varies
varies
UC
NA
This work (RVRF)
✓
✓
✓
T-unq
Game
✓
Notes. “V-PRF” means publicly verifiable pseudorandom output; “PQ” indicates
whether a post-quantum instantiation is provided or explicitly addressed. “NA”
means not addressed; “n/a” means not applicable; “varies” means scheme-dependent
across the literature.“URS” means unique ring signatures.
By contrast, a ring VRF output is a publicly verifiable pseudorandom value tied
to the ring-bound input, while still supporting anonymity. Compared with an
anonymous VRF[25,42], which mainly hides the original public key at verifica-
tion time, an RVRF directly proves that the output comes from some member
of a given ring without revealing which one, and is therefore better suited to ap-
plications centered on anonymous set membership, anonymous authentication,
and nullifier-style identifiers.
Relation to existing (preprint) definitions. The ePrint preprint [6] intro-
duces ring VRFs in the UC framework and studies additional features such as
“ZK continuations.” Our focus and formalization differ in ways that matter for
the use cases above. First, we adopt an explicit algorithmic RVRF interface with
a ring-bound input µ and a suite of game-based notions in the ROM. This makes
the intended deployment semantics, verifiable pseudorandom outputs under ring
anonymity, explicit at the level of concrete experiments, and it emphasizes the
input-tied nature of VRF outputs (the value is computationally indistinguishable
from random, yet still determined by the evaluated input). Second, we param-
eterize uniqueness under anonymity by a corruption bound via T-uniqueness,
which captures corruption-limited equivocation in open networks: an adversary
controlling up to T member keys can induce at most T distinct accepting values
for the same (R, x). This T-parameterized notion aligns with deployment as-
sumptions about bounded compromise and supports clean modular reductions
to the underlying VRF and the one-out-of-many proof layer. 1
1.2
Our approach and technical overview
Our approach is modular. We start from a provable VRF
Πvrf = (Setupvrf, KeyGenvrf, Evalvrf, Verifyvrf),
1 Relative to [6], our formulation makes explicit (i) the dependence of equivocation
on the number of controlled keys (via T-uniqueness), and (ii) the requirement that
outputs remain input-tied pseudorandom values suitable for randomness-driven pro-
tocols ( for more details see Appendix A).
4

where evaluation on µ produces the VRF output and auxiliary witness material:
(v, ωi)
←
Evalvrf(ppvrf, ski, µ). The evaluator then proves, via a one-out-of-
many (OR) proof, that v is consistent with some public key in the ring, without
revealing the index. We introduce our modular construction in Fig. 2.
For our concrete instantiation, the OR layer is realized by a Fiat–Shamir OR
composition in the random oracle model. Conceptually, this follows the clas-
sical “proofs of partial knowledge” paradigm for OR composition of Σ-type
protocols [10] together with Fiat–Shamir compilation and its ROM analysis
toolkit [3,7,20,36]. Algorithmically, the prover simulates all non-witness branches
by choosing random challenge seeds, and completes the witness branch only af-
ter a global Fiat–Shamir constraint is fixed; this yields a globally consistent
transcript while hiding the witness index.
Post-quantum instantiation from lattices. Classical VRFs based on discrete-
log/pairing techniques inherit Shor-type quantum vulnerabilities [40]. This mo-
tivates post-quantum VRFs based on lattice assumptions such as SIS/LWE and
their module variants (e.g., [1, 37]). Lattice proof systems often have a linear-
algebraic structure well suited to OR composition, and many practical construc-
tions employ Fiat–Shamir-with-aborts/rejection sampling techniques [32,33]. We
instantiate our framework with the long-term lattice VRF LaV [17]. Its provabil-
ity relies on a rounding layer certified via the LANES+ methodology, which
builds on the LANES framework—a combination of techniques from [2,16,34].
We also contrast this instantiation with a few-time lattice VRF [15]. For broader
post-quantum context and concrete parameter baselines, we relate to standard
lattice primitives used in practice and standardization efforts [5,14,22].
1.3
Our Contributions
In this work, we introduce a modular and compatible with post-quantum ap-
proaches for Ring Verifiable Random Functions (RVRFs). Our main contribu-
tions are summarized as follows:
– Formal Framework and Security Definitions for RVRFs. We present
an algorithmic RVRF interface with ring binding and a suite of game-based se-
curity notions (correctness, anonymity, pseudorandomness, and T-uniqueness)
designed for verifiable randomness under anonymity.
– Modular Construction via Prover-Side Simulation. We give a modu-
lar compiler from any provable VRF and any OR proof satisfying appropri-
ate properties (namely, completeness, simulatability, extractability) into an
RVRF, and instantiate the OR layer via an optimized FS-OR in the ROM.
– Post-Quantum Lattice-Based Instantiation. We instantiate the frame-
work with LaV[17](long-term) and LB-VRF[15] (few-time), and provide con-
crete cost tables and deployment guidance.
1.4
Organization
Section 2 defines RVRFs and states the security experiments. Section 3 presents
the modular construction, the FS-OR layer (emphasizing prover-side simulation
5

of fake branches), and the LaV instantiation. Section 4 gives the security proofs,
first establishing OR-layer lemmas and then composing them into RVRF theo-
rems. Section 5 discusses parameter settings. The appendix provides a few-time
lattice instantiation (LB-VRF) and proof details.
2
Preliminaries
Notation. We write λ for the security parameter. Unless stated otherwise, all al-
gorithms are probabilistic polynomial-time (PPT). A function negl(λ) is negligi-
ble if it vanishes faster than any inverse polynomial. We write x ←S for sampling
x from a set or distribution S. A ring is represented as a (multi-)set or list of pub-
lic keys. To avoid ambiguity (ordering, duplicates, and encoding variants), we fix:
(i) a deterministic canonicalization procedure Canon(·) and (ii) an injective seri-
alization Enc(·). Concretely, Canon(R) rejects malformed public-key encodings,
sorts the remaining byte-strings under a public total order (e.g., lexicographic or-
der on the serialized keys), and rejects duplicates.2 The encoding Enc(Canon(R))
uses length-delimited framing so that no two different canonical rings map to
the same string. All hash calls are domain-separated with fixed tags. In partic-
ular, we define ring binding as µ = Bind(x, R) := x ∥HR
 Enc(Canon(R))

, and
we use disjoint tags for HR, H, and HFS. We work in the random oracle model
(ROM), treating HFS, H, and HR either as independent random oracles or as
domain-separated calls to a single oracle; all statements below hold under either
interpretation. Unless stated otherwise, all public keys in a ring are assumed
valid: each pk is either generated by KeyGenVRF or is a well-formed encoding
accepted by the underlying VRF’s public procedures (malformed encodings are
rejected). Equivalently, rings may be viewed as drawn from a registration direc-
tory enforcing proof-of-possession. All experiments reject adversary-chosen rings
containing invalid public keys.
2.1
OR / one-out-of-many proof systems (interface)
We will use an OR (or one-out-of-many) proof system for the relation Rring.
Definition 1 (OR proof system (syntax)). An OR proof system for Rring is
a pair of PPT algorithms ΠOR = (ProveOR, VerifyOR) such that:
1. ProveOR((ppvrf, R, µ, v); i, w) →π;
2. VerifyOR((ppvrf, R, µ, v), π) →{0, 1}.
Completeness. If
 (ppvrf, R, µ, v), (i, w)

∈Rring then
VerifyOR((ppvrf, R, µ, v), ProveOR((ppvrf, R, µ, v); i, w)) = 1
except with negligible probability.
2 One may alternatively remove duplicates; the rule must be fixed publicly.
6

Extractability and simulatability (informal). For our compiler theorem,
we will require that ΠOR is (i) extractable (knowledge sound) with an extractor
E, and (ii) simulatable with a simulator Sim, as formalized in the security no-
tions for the resulting ring VRF in Subsection 2.2. (Concrete instantiations in
Subsection 3.3 will realize ΠOR via FS-OR in the ROM.)
2.2
Ring VRFs
Definition 2 (Ring VRF).
A ring VRF (RVRF) ΠRVRF is a tuple of PPT
algorithms (Setup, KeyGen, RingEval, RingVer). The Setup and KeyGen algorithms
generate public parameters pp and a public/secret key pair (pk, sk), respectively.
For a ring R (a finite list of public keys) and an input x ∈{0, 1}∗, evaluation is
performed on the ring-bound input µ := x ∥HR
 Enc(Canon(R))

. The procedures
Canon(·) and Enc(·) are fixed globally as specified in the Notation, and HR is
modeled as a random oracle (or as a domain-separated call to a single random
oracle). The algorithms are defined as follows:
1. Setup(1λ) →pp outputs public parameters (including the public parameters of
the underlying VRF and OR layer, and the description of the random-oracle
interfaces used).
2. KeyGen(pp) →(pk, sk) outputs a key pair.
3. RingEval(pp, sk, R, x) →(v, π) takes as input public parameters pp, a secret
key sk corresponding to some public key in R, a ring R, and an input x. It
outputs a value v ∈V and a proof π.
4. RingVer(pp, R, x, v, π) →{0, 1} takes as input pp, a ring R, an input x, and
a candidate pair (v, π), and outputs 1 if it accepts and 0 otherwise.
Definition 3 (Correctness). A ring VRF with (Setup, KeyGen, RingEval, RingVer)
is correct if for all λ ∈N, for all rings R, and for all x ∈{0, 1}∗, for all
pp ←Setup(1λ) and all keypairs (pk, sk) ←KeyGen(pp) with pk ∈R, it holds
that
Pr[RingVer(pp, R, x, v, π) = 1 | (v, π) ←RingEval(pp, sk, R, x)] ≥1 −negl(λ).
Definition 4 (Anonymity). ΠRVRF is anonymous if for all PPT A,
Advanon
ΠRVRF(A) :=
Pr

Expanon
ΠRVRF(A) = 1

−1
2
 ≤negl(λ),
where the experiment Expanon
ΠRVRF is defined in Figure 1.
We define pseudorandomness using a simulator Sim that on input a public
instance (pp, R, x, v) outputs a proof π intended to be indistinguishable from an
honestly generated proof for the same (R, x, v), without using any secret key.
Definition 5 (k-time pseudorandomness). ΠRVRF is k-time pseudorandom
if there exists a PPT simulator Sim such that for all PPT A,
Advpr,k
ΠRVRF,Sim(A) :=
Pr

Exppr,k
ΠRVRF,Sim(A) = 1

−1
2
 ≤negl(λ),
where the experiment Exppr,k
ΠRVRF,Sim is defined in Figure 1.
7

Expanon
ΠRVRF(A)
1 : pp ←Setup(1λ)
2 : for j ∈[N] :
3 :
(pkj, skj) ←KeyGen(pp)
4 : R ←(pk1, . . . , pkN)
5 : Oracle OCorrupt(j) :
6 :
return skj
7 : (i0, i1, x) ←AOCorrupt(·)(pp, R)
8 : abort if i0 = i1 or A queried
OCorrupt(i0) or OCorrupt(i1)
9 : b ←{0, 1}
10 : (v, π) ←RingEval(pp, skib, R, x)
11 : b′ ←A(x, v, π)
12 : return [ b′ = b ]
Exppr,k
ΠRVRF,Sim(A)
1 : pp ←Setup(1λ)
2 : (pk⋆, sk⋆) ←KeyGen(pp)
3 : R ←A(pp, pk⋆) s.t. pk⋆∈R
4 : Q ←∅
5 : Oracle OEval(x) :
6 :
Q ←Q ∪{x};
7 :
return RingEval(pp, sk⋆, R, x)
8 : x⋆←AOEval(·)(pp, R, pk⋆)
9 : abort if x⋆∈Q or |Q| > k
ExpT -Unq
ΠRVRF(A)
1 : pp ←Setup(1λ)
2 : for j = 1 to N−T :
3 :
(pkj, skj) ←KeyGen(pp)
4 : Rhon ←(pk1, . . . , pkN−T )
5 : {(pkN−T +u, skN−T +u)}T
u=1 ←A(pp, Rhon)
6 : R0 ←(pk1, . . . , pkN)
7 : (R, x, {(vt, πt)}T
t=0) ←A(pp, R0)
8 : if R ̸⊆R0 then return 0
9 : for t = 0, . . . , T :
10 :
if RingVer(pp, R, x, vt, πt) ̸= 1
11 :
then return 0
12 : return [ |{v0, . . . , vT }| = T+1 ]
10 : b ←{0, 1}
11 : if b = 0 :
12 :
(v, π) ←RingEval(pp, sk⋆, R, x⋆)
13 : if b = 1 :
14 :
v ←V;
15 :
π ←Sim(pp, R, x⋆, v)
16 : b′ ←A(x⋆, v, π)
17 : return [ b′ = b ]
Fig. 1: RVRF experiments.
Long-term case. The long-term regime is the same experiment as in Defini-
tion 5, with the query bound replaced by |Q| ≤poly(λ) (and still requiring
x⋆/∈Q).
Remark 1 (Pseudorandomness ⇒fresh-input unforgeability). Assuming correct-
ness and per-input uniqueness for the (ring-bound) VRF value, k-time (resp.
long-term) pseudorandomness immediately implies existential unforgeability on
fresh inputs: any adversary that outputs a new accepting (v⋆, π⋆) for an un-
queried x⋆can be turned into a distinguisher in the pseudorandomness game by
checking whether v⋆matches the challenge value; the full reduction is given in