Masking Ordering Failures in BFT SMR via Proactive
Pre-Commit Execution
Jianting Zhang
Purdue University
Alberto Sonnino
Mysten Labs / UCL
Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias
Mysten Labs
Aniket Kate
Mysten Labs / Purdue University
Abstract
Modern Byzantine fault-tolerant state machine replication
(BFT SMR) systems adopt a decoupled BFT consensus pro-
cess to separate data dissemination from transaction order-
ing as it enables efficient (asynchronous) dissemination even
when ordering fails intermittently under partial synchrony.
Nevertheless, they may still suffer from high transaction con-
firmation latency as the transaction-execution process waits
for the ordering process to complete: the execution process
does not proceed even when transactions are disseminated
if the ordering process stalls.
We propose Pufferfish, the first BFT SMR system that ef-
fectively masks intermittent ordering failures in practice.
Pufferfish introduces a pre-commit execution scheme that
enables replicas to speculatively execute transactions even
during the ordering process stalls. These pre-commit exe-
cution results can be directly committed, if correct, when
the ordering failures are resolved. To achieve this, Pufferfish
builds an adaptive probabilistic speculation mechanism on
top of a DAG-based BFT consensus protocol, enabling repli-
cas to predict and speculatively execute transactions ahead of
confirmed ordering. Additionally, Pufferfish adopts a commit-
aware snapshot mechanism to minimize the overhead of
transaction re-execution in cases of speculation failures. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of Pufferfish, we implement
and evaluate it on a geo-distributed AWS environment. The
evaluation results show that Pufferfish achieves faster recov-
ery and 1.36x speedup on the p99 transaction confirmation
latency compared to the state-of-the-art BFT SMR in the
presence of ordering failures. Even under normal execution,
Pufferfish can achieve a 1.58x speedup on transaction confir-
mation latency under a transaction workload of 80k tps.
ACM Reference Format:
Jianting Zhang, Alberto Sonnino, Lefteris Kokoris-Kogias, and Aniket
Kate. 2026. Masking Ordering Failures in BFT SMR via Proactive
Pre-Commit Execution. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Confer-
ence’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
Introduction
With significant implications in practice, blockchain has
been extensively studied in the distributed systems literature
in the last decade. At the core of blockchain is Byzantine
Fault-Tolerant State Machine Replication (BFT SMR), which
allows a group of replicas to consistently and continuously
handle transactions from blockchain users. In the BFT SMR
problem, replicas run a BFT consensus protocol to dissemi-
nate and order transactions. With the consistent transaction
order established by consensus, correct replicas can execute
transactions and replicate the states consistently.
Modern blockchains/BFT SMRs are primarily designed to
operate in the partial synchrony network model, in which
messages are guaranteed to be delivered within a known
bounded delay after an unknown Global Stabilization Time
(GST) [23]. Theoretically, these partially synchronous BFT
SMRs are expected to reach agreements on transaction orders
forever after GST, under benign conditions (e.g., the leader
is correct). However, in practice, this happy regime only
holds intermittently—numerous attacks can cause ordering
failures [2, 8, 18, 27, 29, 39, 59]. It is observed that the network
can frequently switch between synchrony and asynchrony,
leading to intermittent failures on transaction ordering [28].
To adapt to these intermittent ordering failures, modern
blockchains employ decoupled BFT consensus protocols, in-
cluding multi-chain BFT [22, 28] and a family of Directed
Acyclic Graph (DAG)-based BFT [5, 6, 20, 36, 57, 58, 60, 61].
The decoupled BFT consensus protocols separate data dis-
semination from transaction ordering. In particular, during
the asynchrony periods, the transaction ordering may halt,
but replicas can still keep disseminating transactions without
waiting for the completion of ordering [20]. After the net-
work recovers and becomes synchronous, replicas can estab-
lish an order on the disseminated transactions via extremely
lightweight messages, such as signed-hash digests [25, 66, 78]
and block references [5, 6, 28, 57, 61].
In spite of the numerous advancements in consensus proto-
cols to handle intermittent ordering failures, there remains a
critical gap in efficiently executing transactions during these
failures. For instance, Sui [64], a production blockchain em-
ploying a DAG-based consensus protocol, adopts an execution-
after-consensus scheme, where transactions are executed
only after the transaction order is finalized. In this paper, we
find that the intermittent ordering failures could significantly
affect transaction latency in the existing blockchains. This is
not surprising, as replicas might need to execute an exten-
sive backlog of transactions that were accumulated by data
1

dissemination during the asynchrony periods once the net-
work recovers. To elaborate, unlike the data dissemination
that does not rely on transaction ordering to proceed, trans-
action execution must be aligned with the ordering results
to ensure the state consistency among correct replicas. Be-
fore the transaction order is established, those ever-growing
disseminated transactions can stress the execution overhead
once the network recovers, leading to a severe degradation
of the transaction confirmation latency.
This paper aims at filling this gap. We propose Puffer-
fish, a novel BFT SMR system that effectively reduces the
transaction confirmation latency under intermittent order-
ing failures while maintaining high transaction throughput.
The core idea of Pufferfish is to incorporate a pre-commit
execution scheme into a decoupled BFT consensus, allowing
replicas to speculatively execute transactions even during
ordering stalls. By the time the ordering stalls are resolved,
Pufferfish would have already performed the bulk of the com-
putation, allowing near-instantaneous commitment. How-
ever, designing an effective pre-commit execution scheme
for a BFT SMR system is non-trivial. Pufferfish must ensure
that as many speculative execution results as possible remain
valid; that is, transactions should be speculatively executed
in the same order as the final consensus order. Otherwise,
those results become invalid, and replicas must re-execute
the backlog after ordering recovers, reducing the system to
the baseline execution-after-ordering design.
Pufferfish addresses the above challenges via three tech-
niques. First, Pufferfish employs a DAG-based consensus
protocol to achieve efficient data dissemination while pre-
serving an order continuity property, which ensures that
speculative orders remain stable and are likely to be prefixes
of the final consensus order (Section 4.1). Second, Pufferfish
introduces an adaptive probabilistic speculation (APS) mecha-
nism to allow replicas to predict the most likely consensus
order, significantly reducing the probability of re-execution
caused by the inconsistent speculative order (Section 4.2).
Specifically, with the heuristics derived from the dissem-
inated DAG of blocks, replicas can adaptively update the
speculative order for later pre-commit execution, making
it always most likely consistent with the consensus order.
Third, Pufferfish designs a commit-aware snapshot mecha-
nism to achieve fast recovery when pre-commit execution
fails, without introducing heavy memory or storage over-
head (Section 4.3). Specifically, instead of taking snapshots
after pre-commit execution for every speculative order, repli-
cas only take a lightweight snapshot when they suspect an
incoming speculative order is invalid using a reputation-
based decision strategy. This avoids excessive snapshots and
reduces memory and storage overhead. Once the speculative
order is indeed invalid, replicas can quickly roll back to the
latest valid snapshot and re-execute only a smaller set of
transactions whose order is invalid, thereby minimizing the
overhead caused by mis-speculations.
To demonstrate its effectiveness, we implement Pufferfish
on top of Mysticeti [6], a DAG-based BFT consensus protocol
deployed in the Sui blockchain [64], and evaluate it against
a representative BFT SMR system in a geo-distributed AWS
environment. The evaluation results show that Pufferfish
can achieve 1.36x-1.58x speedup on transaction confirmation
latency compared to the representative BFT SMR system.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We present Pufferfish, which, to the best of our knowledge,
is the first BFT SMR system designed to effectively cir-
cumvent the performance degradation under intermittent
ordering failures in practice.
• We design an adaptive probabilistic speculation mecha-
nism to help replicas predict the speculative execution
order effectively, and a commit-aware snapshot mecha-
nism to minimize the overhead of transaction re-execution
in cases of speculation failures.
• We implement Pufferfish on top of Mysticeti and evaluate
it on a geo-distributed AWS environment. The evaluation
results show that Pufferfish can achieve 1.58x speedup
on transaction confirmation latency under common cases,
and faster recovery with 1.36x speedup on the tail p99
transaction confirmation latency in the presence of order-
ing failures compared to the representative BFT SMR.
2
Background and Motivation
2.1
BFT SMR
BFT SMR is the standard primitive for building fault-tolerant
distributed systems, such as blockchains. In this model, clients
submit transactions to a set of replicas to induce state transi-
tions (in the blockchain context, the system state typically
comprises a key-value store mapping client identities to data
such as account balances and smart contract storage). A BFT
SMR system must ensure that this state remains consistent
across all correct replicas while maintaining the ability to
process new client requests. More formally, let 𝑆𝑡𝑖
⊢𝑘denote
the system state maintained by replica 𝑅𝑖after executing a
sequence of transactions up to index 𝑘, the BFT SMR must
guarantee the following properties:
• Safety: If sequences of transactions (𝑡𝑥1, · · · ,𝑡𝑥𝑚) and
(𝑡𝑥′
1, · · · ,𝑡𝑥′
𝑚′) are committed by two correct replicas 𝑅𝑖
and𝑅𝑗, then𝑡𝑥𝑛= 𝑡𝑥′
𝑛and𝑆𝑡𝑖
⊢𝑛= 𝑆𝑡𝑗
⊢𝑛for all𝑛≤𝑚𝑖𝑛{𝑚,𝑚′},
namely, any two correct replicas commit the same prefix
transaction list and states.
• Liveness: If a transaction 𝑡𝑥is sent to correct replicas, 𝑡𝑥
will be eventually committed by all correct replicas.
The transaction processing pipeline in BFT SMR can be
decomposed into three repeated tasks [17, 78]: (i) Data dis-
semination, a bandwidth-bound task where replicas propa-
gate transactions to other replicas; (ii) Ordering, a network-
sensitive task where replicas reach consensus on a total order
2

of the disseminated transactions; (iii) Execution, a computation-
intensive task where replicas execute transactions in the
consensus order to update the system state. A BFT SMR sys-
tem is typically implemented with a BFT consensus protocol
(responsible for data dissemination and ordering) and an
execution engine (responsible for execution).
2.2
Partially Synchronous SMR in Practice
Modern BFT SMR systems primarily operate in a partially
synchronous network model [23], where message delays are
unbounded before an unknown Global Stabilization Time
(GST), and bounded by a known delay Δ after GST. Infor-
mally, there exists a magic time GST, before which the net-
work is asynchronous and after which it is synchronous.
In realistic deployment, the partially synchronous BFT
SMR accommodates this network model by using timeouts:
replicas wait for a certain time duration before they conclude
that the system makes no progress and take actions, such as
performing a view change mechanism. To make sure that
all correct replicas can enter the same view to perform the
ordering task after GST, the timeout has to be set delicately,
which is typically measured and associated with the network
delay Δ (e.g., the timeout is set to be 8Δ in [57]). With the
delicate setting, the timeout is expected to not be triggered
after GST, unless in the event of leader failure.
Intermittent Ordering Failure. However, in practice, this
happy regime is not held, and timeouts can be triggered
intermittently. The network delay Δ can fluctuate due to
many factors such as network failures (e.g., packet loss) and
network adversaries (e.g., DDoS attack) [2, 8, 18, 27–29, 39,
59]. Moreover, malicious replicas can trigger timeouts by not
proposing ordering proposals. As a result, the ordering task
can fail intermittently whenever the timeout is triggered. In
this paper, we refer to such a phenomenon as intermittent
ordering failure.
2.3
Decoupled BFT Consensus
Decoupled BFT consensus protocols are designed to (par-
tially) mitigate intermittent ordering failures by separating
data dissemination from ordering logic. This separation al-
lows replicas to continue disseminating transactions even
when ordering fails intermittently. Modern decoupled con-
sensus protocols generally fall into three categories (we defer
a more detailed comparison to Appendix A):
Batch-based BFT protocols [25, 32, 35, 42, 66, 74, 78] dis-
seminate transactions in batches, independently of ordering.
Replicas continuously group new transactions into batches
and broadcast them for data availability. When performing
ordering, replicas replace full transactions with lightweight
digests of batches in ordering proposals. As transactions
can be disseminated asynchronously, this design enables
continuous dissemination despite ordering failures.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Request start time (s)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Latency (s)
Existing SMR
Ordering Failures
Recovery Time
Figure 1. The transaction latency and recovery time of ex-
isting SMR systems under intermittent ordering failures.
Figure 2. Execution jitter during the Sui testnet incident
(June 2025). The x-axis shows time (incident started at 00:15)
and the y-axis shows transaction latency overhead (ms).
Multichain BFT protocols [22, 28] use multiple parallel
chains for dissemination. Each replica packages its received
transactions into blocks appended to its own chain and broad-
casts these blocks to certify the availability of both the block
and its chain history. Ordering is performed separately by
replicas running an ordering/consensus protocol, using as
input the signed digest of the latest block from each chain.
Compared to batch-based protocols, multichain protocols
require a bounded size of data in an ordering proposal since
only the latest block digest of each chain is needed.
DAG-based BFT protocols [5, 6, 20, 36, 57, 58, 60, 61] dis-
seminate transactions in a structure of Directed Acyclic
Graph (DAG), where blocks of transactions are DAG vertices
and the references among them form edges. Each replica cre-
ates and disseminates new blocks in rounds, with each block
referencing a quorum of blocks from the previous round.
With the established DAG, replicas perform the ordering task
by locally interpreting the DAG, e.g., determining whether a
block is sufficiently referenced in subsequent rounds to be
committed and ordered. Compared to other decoupled BFT
consensus, DAG-based consensus can achieve more efficient
ordering due to the elimination of view change [79].
2.4
Motivation
Although decoupled BFT consensus protocols take an im-
portant first step toward mitigating intermittent ordering
failures, they do not fully resolve the problem. This can still
severely impact transaction execution.
Unlike data dissemination, which proceeds independently
of ordering, transaction execution relies on the ordered out-
put of the consensus protocol to ensure safety. When order-
ing fails, replicas cannot obtain new ordered transactions to
execute, leaving computational resources idle. More impor-
tantly, decoupled BFT consensus protocols can exacerbate
3

this issue: transactions continue to accumulate during the
failure period, and once the network recovers and ordering
resumes, replicas must process a large backlog. This burst of
deferred execution can overwhelm computational resources,
significantly increasing transaction latency. Figure 1 illus-
trates this effect by showing the transaction confirmation
latency and recovery time of existing BFT SMR systems un-
der intermittent ordering failures (evaluation settings are
detailed in Section 6.2). During the ordering failure period
(10s-21s), transactions accumulate in the system, and after
recovery, existing SMR systems require a prolonged catch-up
phase (around 6 seconds) to drain the backlog, resulting in
a substantial latency increase. Similarly, the Sui testnet ex-
perienced a roughly one-day halt in June 2025 after replicas
failed to locally confirm transactions and had to process a
large backlog (as shown in Figure 2), illustrating how order-
ing failures can severely disrupt progress even in modern
blockchain deployments [63].
To fully address the challenges introduced by intermittent
ordering failures, it is crucial to design a BFT SMR system
that effectively adapts to such failures in practice. However,
upon reviewing related studies, we find a notable absence of
comprehensive investigations into this problem. This paper
aims to fill this gap by presenting a novel BFT SMR.
3
Model, Challenges, and Overview
This paper presents Pufferfish, a novel BFT SMR system
that masks performance degradation caused by intermittent
ordering failures in practice. To achieve this, Pufferfish incor-
porates a pre-commit execution scheme into a decoupled BFT
consensus protocol, enabling replicas to speculatively exe-
cute transactions during data dissemination without waiting
for final ordering (We use pre-commit and speculative exe-
cution interchangeably in the rest of this paper). By allowing
execution to proceed even when ordering stalls, replicas can
later directly commit correct pre-commit execution results
once ordering completes. This design eliminates the execu-
tion stall and significantly reduces the backlog-processing
overhead after recovery. In this section, we present the sys-
tem model, key challenges, and an overview of Pufferfish.
Models. In Pufferfish, we consider a group of 𝑛=3𝑓+1 repli-
cas R = {𝑅1, 𝑅2, · · · , 𝑅𝑛}, of which up to 𝑓are Byzantine.
The Byzantine replicas can behave arbitrarily to compro-
mise the system, but they have bounded computation and
cannot break the cryptographic primitives. The remaining
replicas are correct. We assume a public-key infrastructure
with digital signatures for authentication. As in prior par-
tially synchronous BFT SMR systems [10, 62, 78], the system
operates under partial synchrony [23], where liveness is
guaranteed only during periods of synchrony.
Challenges. Designing an effective pre-commit execution
scheme to mitigate ordering failures is non-trivial. The core
challenge is to ensure that speculative execution remains
largely consistent with the consensus order, so that pre-
commit execution results can be directly committed without
re-execution. This challenge stems from the inherent depen-
dence of execution on ordering. While data dissemination
is order-independent, execution must follow a total order
consistent with consensus to ensure safety. If speculative
execution deviates from the final order, its results become in-
valid, forcing replicas to roll back and re-execute transactions.
In the worst case, this reduces Pufferfish to the unoptimized
design, negating any benefit in masking ordering failures.
Overview. To effectively mask ordering failures, Pufferfish
is built on three key components: (i) a dedicated DAG-based
consensus protocol; (ii) an adaptive probabilistic speculation
(APS) mechanism; (iii) a commit-aware snapshot mechanism.
DAG-based consensus (section 4.1). Pufferfish adopts Mys-
ticeti [6], a state-of-the-art DAG-based BFT consensus pro-
tocol. Its decoupled design enables efficient transaction dis-
semination even when ordering stalls. More importantly, the
DAG structure provides an order continuity property: subse-
quent ordering instances naturally extend prior (even failed)
ordering attempts through causal dependencies encoded in
the DAG. As a result, new ordering decisions tend to preserve
previously implied orders, reducing the likelihood that spec-
ulative execution must be discarded. This property is critical
because it increases the fraction of speculative execution
results that remain valid and can be committed directly.
Adaptive probabilistic speculation (Section 4.2). While
order continuity improves stability, it does not guarantee
that speculative execution matches the final consensus order.
Replicas must therefore predict a likely speculative execu-
tion order. To this end, Pufferfish introduces an adaptive
probabilistic speculation (APS) mechanism. APS leverages
structural information in the DAG (e.g., implicit voting pat-
terns over leader blocks) to estimate the likelihood of differ-
ent ordering outcomes. Based on the likelihood estimation,
each replica adaptively selects a speculative execution order
that is most likely consistent with the final consensus order,
thereby maximizing the valid pre-commit execution results.
Commit-aware snapshot (Section 4.3). Despite careful
speculation, mis-speculation is unavoidable due to network
asynchrony and Byzantine behavior. To mitigate this cost,
Pufferfish employs a commit-aware snapshot mechanism to
preserve as many valid pre-commit execution results as possi-
ble by taking snapshots without introducing heavy memory
or storage overhead. Briefly, instead of eagerly snapshotting
every speculative order, replicas take lightweight snapshots
only when mis-speculation is likely. Once the speculative
order is indeed invalid, replicas roll back to the most recent
valid snapshot and re-executes only the affected transactions.
Figure 3 illustrates the overall workflow of Pufferfish.
Transaction processing proceeds as follows:
4

DAG-based Consensus
(Section 4.1)
APS Mechanism
(Section 4.2)
Commit-aware
Snapshot (Section 4.3)
Execution 
Engine
Storage
1. Local 
DAG view
2. Speculative order
Consensus 
order
3. Suspect 
fault?
4. Happy path
5. Fallback 
path
Figure 3. Overview of Pufferfish: replicas run an underlying
DAG-based consensus for efficient data dissemination, pre-
dict the transaction order with the APS mechanism, and spec-
ulatively execute transactions while taking commit-aware
snapshots, by which transactions are efficiently committed
with speculative execution results and snapshots even dur-
ing intermittent ordering failures.
1. Replicas employ Mysticeti to efficiently disseminate blocks
of transactions and forward them to the APS module.
2. The APS module derives a speculative order from the local
DAG view and passes it to the execution engine.
3. If the speculative order involves potentially faulty lead-
ers, the replica takes a snapshot before execution. It then
speculatively executes transactions in the predicted order.
4. (Happy path) Once consensus finalizes the order, the replica
verifies consistency. If the speculative order matches, the
execution results are directly committed.
5. (Fallback path) If the speculative order is inconsistent,
the replica rolls back to the latest valid snapshot and re-
executes only the affected transactions before committing.
4
Pufferfish Protocol
4.1
Mysticeti Consensus
Pufferfish is built on Mysticeti consensus protocol. Mysticeti
disseminates transactions in blocks that form a DAG, where