1
Spectre Without Dependent Load
Can Aknesil1
Andreas Lindner2
Roberto Guanciale1
Hamed Nemati1
1KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
{aknesil, robertog, hnnemati}@kth.se
2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
andreas.lindner@angstrom.uu.se
Abstract—Transient execution attacks that disclose arbitrary
memory commonly assume a multi-stage read-then-transmit gad-
get: a transient load to fetch secret data and a subsequent
operation to leak that data into an observable side channel. We
show that this assumption does not hold under electromagnetic
(EM) observations, by verifying that a single transient load al-
ready produces value-dependent EM leakage without any explicit
follow-up transmission instruction or relying on prefetching. Our
results expand the set of exploitable gadgets and show that even
simple processors like the Cortex-A53 are vulnerable.
Keywords—microarchitectural
security,
electromagnetic
side channel attacks, speculative execution
I. INTRODUCTION
Practical attacks that leverage speculative execution were
first demonstrated in 2018 with the infamous Spectre attack [1]
that exploits transient instructions to extract arbitrary informa-
tion from a target program’s memory.
In this paper, we show that transient execution attacks that
leak arbitrary memory are possible with simpler gadgets than
demonstrated before, given that the adversary can observe the
EM side channel. Such gadgets can be executed on proces-
sors with limited speculation support that were previously
considered secure, e.g., ARM Cortex-A53. Additionally, the
high prevalence of simpler gadgets in software makes existing
mitigations ineffective and increases the performance overhead
of protected programs. The vulnerability we identified has not
been reported in prior work.
We confirm the discovered vulnerability on Raspberry Pi 3,
featuring an ARM Cortex-A53 processor, through Test Vector
Leakage Assessment (TVLA).
II. RELAXING THE SPECTRE-PHT GADGET
The gadget used in the Spectre PHT variant, namely the
double-load gadget, is shown in Fig. 1. The vast majority
of transient execution attacks consists of three distinct com-
ponents: (line 1) an instruction whose result is predicted by
the processor, in this case, the result of a conditional branch;
(line 2) a reading instruction that allows the adversary to
speculatively fetch from attacker-controlled addresses; (line
3) a transmitting instruction that affects the microarchitectural
state with the fetched value.
This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous
Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice
Wallenberg Foundation, the Wallenberg Launch Pad (WALP), and a gift from
Intel and Amazon.
Fig. 1: Double-load gadget, i.e., the original Spectre gadget (top),
single-load gadget (bottom).
1 if (x < A_size) {
2
y = A[x];
// Load 1
3
z = B[y];
// Load 2
4 }
1 if (x < A_size) {
2
y = A[x];
// Load 1
3 }
On a non-speculative processor, the program cannot read A
out of bounds, and the only values that can be exfiltrated via a
cache side channel are x and the elements of A. This program
would be considered free of side-channel vulnerabilities as
long as both x and A are public. However, a speculative
processor can transiently execute the conditional block, even if
the index x is out of bounds, reading and processing arbitrary
values from the program’s memory. In case of misprediction,
the calculations done during speculation are discarded; how-
ever, the side effects may not be completely reversed, leaving
traces of the information read in various side channels. In this
case, line 3 would leak y by affecting the cache. Similarly,
processing of y can also leave traces in the power and EM
side channels.
The single-load gadget, shown in Fig. 1, is a relaxed version
of the double-load gadget, where Load 2 is not present, or not
executed in speculation. To date, the single-load gadget has
been considered less dangerous than the double-load gadget,
as only reading arbitrary memory is assumed to be harmless
without any subsequent instruction that processes and, thus,
leaks the resulting value. In this paper, however, we show
that a single load instruction can read an out-of-bounds value
from the memory and, simultaneously, leak it into the EM side
channel. This is simply because loading data from memory
has an associated footprint in the EM radiation. From this
realization, it follows that the single-load gadget can be as
dangerous as the double-load gadget, given that the adversary
can observe the EM side channel.
Due to the relaxed requirements of the single-load gadget
compared to the double-load gadget, some processors can
speculatively execute the former but not the latter. An example
is the Cortex-A53 processor, which can execute load opera-
tions in speculation, but cannot if they depend on speculatively
loaded values [2]. Another example is the CVA6 RISC-V
processor [3], which can only execute a single load operation

2
Fig. 2: EM side-channel analysis setup showing the near-field EM
probe connected to the signal amplifier placed on the target device.
in speculation if configured with a small scoreboard.
III. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The experimental setup, shown in Fig. 2, consists of a
Raspberry Pi 3 Model B Rev 1.2 [4] with a Cortex-A53
processor, where the target program is executed, a CW1173
ChipWhisperer Lite capture board [5], a NAE-HPROBE-15
near-field EM probe [6], and a CW502 amplifier [7].
The target program contains a single-load gadget that leaks
a 4-byte word through speculatively loading from the main
memory. It is executed as a regular user-space process on
the Linux OS using the default configuration provided for
the Raspberry Pi 3, and therefore runs concurrently with
other processes on the system. Although we did not run any
resource-intensive workloads that could significantly interfere
with the target program, the target program is still subject to
the typical background activity present in a near-idle system.
The capture device is configured with a sampling frequency
of 105 MHz (maximum possible for the capture device).
Capturing is synchronized with the execution of the target
program via an external trigger signal; however, without
clock synchronization. All measurements are performed in
a typical office environment without any protection against
environmental noise.
IV. EVALUATION
The evaluation comprises Test Vector Leakage Assessment
(TVLA). The results prove that the resulting value of a
transient load instruction leaks into the EM side channel.
TVLA is performed byte-wise using Welch’s t-test [8] ac-
cording to the Hamming weight (number of 1s) of the leaking
value. The number of traces used in TVLA is 3,600,000.
TVLA results are illustrated alongside the averaged trace
in Fig. 3. The maximum t-value magnitudes for each byte,
from 0 to 3, of the leaking word are 110.6, 170.2, 61.5, and
38.8, respectively. The results strongly indicate the presence
of leakage, as all t-value magnitudes are significantly greater
than 4.5.
V. CONCLUSION
We have uncovered a new attack vector related to EM leak-
age due to speculative execution by showing that the transient
execution of a single load instruction can leak arbitrary mem-
ory through the EM side channel. Due to the simplicity of the
single-load gadget, the attack is possible on simpler hardware
that was previously considered secure, and countermeasures
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.010
0.005
0.000
0.005
EM Reading
Averaged EM Trace
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
t-value
TVLA Result
Byte 0
Byte 1
Byte 2
Byte 3
Fig. 3: Averaged EM trace (top) and the TVLA results (bottom).
needed for mitigating the presented vulnerability are expected
to be costlier than existing ones.
Although the experiments focus on conditional branch pre-
diction, it is evident that the same vulnerability also applies
to other forms of speculation. Moreover, the attack is likely
to be feasible through additional side channels, in particular,
power side channels, whose physical characteristics are closely
related to those of EM leakage.
RESPONSIBLE DISCLOSURE
After confirming the vulnerability experimentally, we con-
tacted ARM and Raspberry Pi, and neither raised any objec-
tions to publishing our findings.