Outsourced Private Set Intersection for Pairwise
Analytics
Ferran Alborch1, Tangi De Kerdrel2, Antonio Faonio1, and Melek Önen1
EURECOM, Sophia Antipolis, France
{ferran.alborch,antonio.faonio,melek.onen}@eurecom.fr
Orange Innovation, Caen, France
tangi.dekerdrel@orange.com
Abstract. This paper studies privacy-preserving data analytics in set-
tings where multiple parties hold sensitive datasets and want to compute
global statistics without revealing their data. We focus on computing the
total number of common elements (cardinality of intersections) across
multiple pairs of datasets, while ensuring that only the final aggregated
result is disclosed and no intermediate information (such as individual
intersections) is leaked. To address this problem, we introduce a new
cryptographic primitive called outsourced cardinality private set intersec-
tion with secret-shared outputs (CaOPSI-SS). Our solution is extremely
simple and uses pseudorandom functions and two non-colluding servers
to offload computation, making it suitable for environments with het-
erogeneous resources. Building on this primitive, we design a protocol
for aggregated pairwise analytics that computes the sum of intersection
cardinalities across many parties. We apply our framework to a real-
world use case: privacy-preserving mail analytics in large organizations
with multiple subsidiaries. The system allows useful fine-grained queries
over email logs while protecting sensitive HR data. We also extend the
solution with differential privacy mechanisms to further protect individ-
ual records. Finally, we implement and evaluate the protocol, showing
its scalability and practicality for large datasets. Our solution enables
parties to obliviously offload their datasets to two non-colluding servers
using pseudorandom functions and further execute a circuit-PSI among
these two servers to obtain secret shares of the output.
Keywords: Private Set Intersection · Delegated Computation · Multi-
party Analytics.
1
Introduction
Performing large scale data analysis while keeping data privacy, has become a
major concern ever since the exponential increase in the use of sensitive data in
the digital world and the increasing need for compliance with regulations like
GDPR. The objective of many stakeholders is that by computing some analytics
over data, to obtain valuable insights to improve the quality of their products

2
Alborch et al.
or services without exposing sensitive information. The paradigm of privacy-
preserving analytics then originated to allow parties to perform operations over
data while keeping individual information secure.
In this work we consider the scenario where multiple entities, each owning
a private dataset, want to compute aggregate statistics over some pairwise op-
eration over the datasets. In particular, we are interested in the cardinality of
the intersection, whicch has been used as a pairwise operation through multi-
ple use cases including privacy-preserving contact tracing during the COVID-19
pandemic [36,5]. While there has been a lot of research on cardinality private
set intersection [7,37], we investigate the scenario whereby a party is willing to
compute the cardinality of the intersection among multiple pairs of datasets and
obtain the ultimate sum (or aggregate cardinality), only. The main privacy goal
in this scenario is that nothing more than the ultimate aggregate cardinality
should be disclosed. In particular, when multiple datasets owned by different
parties are involved in these analytics, the individual outputs of the pairwise
operations should not be revealed to anyone. In a similar manner, the size of the
datasets involved in the operation should not be leaked.
In addition, we will be considering a heterogeneous environment in terms
of resources (computation and/or memory), where while some parties may have
sufficient resources to store large databases and can perform costly computations
at their side, some others may not. This consideration comes especially into play
when the number of parties is large, since each party would have to perform the
same operation with all the other parties, one-by-one. This may results in an
unreasonable overhead for the parties with constrained resources.
To address this, we propose a new outsourced cardinality-PSI solution in-
volving two non-colluding servers to perform the pairwise cardinality-PSI opera-
tions. The solution makes use of pseudorandom functions to enable parties send
an oblivious version of their sets to the servers who later run a cardinality-PSI
protocol where the output consists of secret shares of the cardinality, guaran-
teeing that the output of this protocol remains hidden. We further demonstrate
the use of this primitive in a privacy-preserving mail analytics scenario whereby
the two servers perform multiple, pairwise private set intersections over different
mail databases and further output the sum of cardinalities as the final output,
only. Finally, to further solidify the privacy preserving guarantees of the system,
we also study the use of differential privacy mechanisms in order to protect the
individual records in the private datasets.
Contributions. We propose the following contributions.
– Outsourced private set intersection with hidden outputs: We first
define outsourced private set intersection with hidden outputs which we call
CaOPSI-SS, for which we give an instantiation based on pseudo-random
functions and cardinality circuit private set intersection as building blocks.
– Outsourced analytics on pairwise intersections: We then give an in-
stantiation of outsourced analytics over pairwise intersections, which we call

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
3
PWPSI-Agg, based on outsourced private set intersection with hidden out-
puts.
– Private mail analytics: Finally, we use the pairwise analytics functional-
ity to build a protocol for multi-entity mail analytics, considering both the
standard as well as the differentially private case. This protocol is evaluated
and fully benchmarked using a synthetic database generated based on mail
traffic of a large corporate telecommunications group.
Outline. Section 2 reviews the state of the art. Section 3 defines the building
blocks to construct our solution. In Section 4, we formally define outsourced
cardinality PSI with hidden outputs and give a construction, whereas in Section5
we study the use case of mail analytics for a large corporate group making use
of our new primitive. Finally, in Section 6 we analyze and benchmark a concrete
implementation of our solutions
2
Related Work
Private Set Intersection (PSI) . PSI was first proposed by Meadows in [27] as
a primitive capable of outputting the intersection of two hidden sets without
leaking anything else, and instantiated through the Diffie-Hellman assumption.
Since then, the field has been vastly studied, with instantiations from many dif-
ferent primitives, such as homomorphic encryption [9,8], polynomials over finite
fields [20,15], or oblivious primitives such as oblivious transfer with oblivious
pseudo-random functions [31,30] or oblivious key-value stores with vector obliv-
ious linear evaluation [33,32].
Circuit-Private Set Intersection (cPSI). CPSI was first proposed by Huang et
al. in [21] as a primitive where instead of outputting the elements in the inter-
section of two hidden sets, it outputs a circuit computed over such intersection
and nothing else. More recently, the paradigm of cPSI constructions has veered
towards PSI with secret shared outputs, where the protocols output a set of
secret shares (one per element in one of the sets) with them being shares of 0
if the element is not in the intersection, or shares of 1 if the element is in the
intersection [7,37]. This allows, indeed, to compute any arbitrary circuit over the
intersection by leveraging generic multi-party computation paradigms [38,16,4].
Outsourced Private Set Intersection (OPSI). OPSI was proposed by Kerschbaum
in [23,24] as a way to leverage the computational power of a third party to per-
form computationally expensive operations and, hence, allow less powerful par-
ties to participate to the protocol. Similarly to standard PSI, OPSI has been
instantiated from a plethora of primitives, such as homomorphic encryption
[2,12], pseudo-random permutations [22,1], secret-sharing [28,26] or even proxy
re-encryption [40,39]. For a more in-depth analysis and comparison we refer to
the survey in [19].

4
Alborch et al.
In our quest to build a system capable of performing private mail analytics
we are looking for three properties: outsourced computation, non-interactivity
between subsidiary entities, and hidden outputs. While one can find a scheme
satisfying any two of these three properties, to the best of our knowledge no
scheme exists satisfying all three properties simultaneously. Therefore, we define
a new primitive Cardinality Outsourced Private Set Intersection with secret-
shared output (CaOPSI-SS), for which we give a construction based on cPSI, and
then use to construct our protocol for Aggregated Pairwise Cardinality Private
Set Intersection.
3
Preliminaries
3.1
Notation
For any k ∈Z>0 we define [k] as the set {1, . . . , k}. Given any set S, s ←R S
denotes that s is sampled uniformly at random in the set S. Given a probability
distribution D, we denote a sample y from D as y ←D. We denote probabilistic
polynomial-time algorithms as PPT. Finally, we say a function f is negligible
over n (f = negl(n)) if for all k ∈N>0, there exists n0 ∈N>0 such that for any
n > n0, |f(n)| < 1/nk.
3.2
Pseudo-Random Function
A pseudorandom function is a polynomial-time function that cannot be dis-
tinguished from a truly random function by an adversary. More formally, it is
defined as follows:
Definition 1 (Pseudorandom function). Let κ be a security parameter, K
be a key space, X be an input space, Y be an output space, and F be the family
of all functions from X to Y . We say that function Φ : K ×X →Y is a pseudo-
random function (PRF) if for any PPT distinguisher A
|Pr[k ←R K : AΦ = 1] −Pr[F ←R F : AF = 1]| ≤negl(κ).
3.3
Secret Sharing
A Secret sharing scheme [35] is a cryptographic primitive that allows n parties
to share secret information in such a way that the secret can only be recovered
when t of them cooperate. In this work, we make use of n-out-of-n secret sharing
(where n = t) which is formally defined as follows.
Definition 2 (n-out-of-n Secret Sharing Scheme). Let κ ∈Z>0 be a secu-
rity parameter. We define a n-out-of-n secret sharing scheme as the following
tuple of PPT algorithms.
– SS.Share(x): given an element x as input, it outputs n secret shares {JxK(i)}i∈[n].

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
5
Functionality 1 2-party Cardinality Circuit Private Set Intersection FCacPSI
Parameters. A secret sharing scheme SS = (Share, Combine).
Inputs. Party P1 inputs a set X1 of elements, P2 inputs a set X2 of elements.
Outputs. P1 and P2 output JcK(i) for i ∈{1, 2} secret shares of c = |X1 ∩X2|.
– SS.Combine({JxK(i)}i∈[n]): given n compatible secret shares {JxK(i)}i∈[n], it
outputs a string res.
There are many different ways of instantiating secret sharing schemes, each
with their own properties. In this work we will focus on linear secret sharing
schemes, which have the property of being linearly homomorphic. In other words
for any coefficients a, b and elements x0, x1, we have
a · Jx0K(i) + b · Jx1K(i) = Ja · x0 + b · x1K(i),
for i ∈{1, 2}.
3.4
Private Set Intersection
Private Set Intersection (PSI) is a multi-party protocol allowing n different par-
ties P1, . . . , Pn owning respective private sets X1, . . . , Xn to obliviously compute
the intersection X1 ∩. . . ∩Xn without revealing any other information about
the private sets. Since the first proposals, many different variants have been pro-
posed and studied to handle differing particular problems. Relevant to this work,
we will deal with 2-party circuit-PSI and outsourced PSI protocols.
Circuit PSI. A circuit-PSI (cPSI) protocols is a generalization of PSI protocol
where instead of outputting the intersection in clear, it outputs secret shares
of the intersection. Then, generic 2-party computation [38,16,4] can be used to
compute any arbitrary circuit over the intersection. More specifically, parties
P1, P2 input sets X1, X2 respectively, and for each element in X1, the protocol
outputs a secret share of 1 if the element is in X1 ∩X2 and a secret share of 0
otherwise.
In this work, we use a special case called cardinality circuit PSI, where the
output a single secret share of the cardinality of the intersection instead of a
secret share for each element. For the ideal functionality see Functionality 1.
The ideal functionality is parameterized by the secret sharing scheme.
Remark 1. Note that cardinality-circuit-PSI is trivially constructible from stan-
dard circuit-PSI (where the outputs are secret shares of 1 or 0 depending on
whether an element is in the intersection or not) with linear secret shares. To
construct the shares of the cardinal, each party locally aggregates all the secret
shares corresponding to each element.

6
Alborch et al.
Functionality 2 FCaOPSI-SS
Inputs. Party P1 inputs a set X1 of elements, P2 inputs a set X2 of elements, the servers
S1, S2 input nothing.
Outputs. P1 and P2 output nothing, S1 and S2 output JcK(i) for i ∈{1, 2} secret shares
of c = |X1 ∩X2|.
Leakage. If a server Si is corrupted, the adversary receives |X1| and |X2|.
4
Construction for Pairwise Analytics: From CacPSI
4.1
Outsourced PSI with Hidden Outputs
An outsourced (or delegated) PSI protocols is a variant of standard PSI pro-
tocol where computationally expensive operations are outsourced powerful but
untrusted servers. An outsourced PSI may differ depending on how involved the
servers are in the protocol, whether it is the servers or the parties who store the
data and whether it is the servers or the parties who obtain the result after the
computation is done.
In this work, the clients store the data while the servers receives the output,
which is a secret sharing of the cardinality. We call this functionality CaOPSI-
SS. More specifically, parties P1, P2 input X1, X2 respectively and the servers
S1, S2 input nothing, and the protocol outputs to the server Si the secret share
JcK(i), which are secret shares of c = |X1 ∩X2| and nothing to P1, P2. For the
ideal functionality see Functionality 2.
Remark 2. As in Remark 1, one can define outsourced PSI with shared outputs
as releasing a secret share of either 1 or 0 per element in one of the sets, which
can be trivially transformed into sharing the cardinality.
Protocol Description. The protocol is described in Protocol 1. At a high
level, it is quite simple. Each party encodes its input set using a pseudorandom
function; the resulting pseudorandom values are then sent to the servers, which
execute a standard cardinality PSI protocol. The protocol is outsourced in the
sense that the parties perform only a linear number (in the size of their sets) of
symmetric-key operations.
Correctness and Security.
Theorem 1. Assume that Φ is a pseudorandom function. Then the protocol
ΠCaOPSI-SS correctly and securely realizes the ideal functionality FCaOPSI-SS in
the FCaPSI-hybrid model in the presence of a single semi-honest adversary.
Proof Sketch. We provide a proof sketch. Correctness follows from the fact that,
except with negligible probability due to collisions in the PRF outputs, the

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
7
Protocol 1 ΠCaOPSI-SS
Inputs: Party P1 inputs a set X1 of elements, P2 inputs a set X2 of elements, the
servers S1, S2 input nothing.
Outputs: P1 and P2 output nothing, S1 and S2 output JcK(i) for i ∈{1, 2} secret
shares of c = |X1 ∩X2|.
The protocol:
Offline Step, parties execute only once:
0. Each party Pi samples ki ←{0, 1}n and sends ki to the other party P2−i. The
parties set k ←k1 ⊕k2.
Online Steps:
1. Each party Pi computes the elements ˜
Xi := Φk(Xi) and sends them to Si. Where
˜
Xi := {Φk(xij) : xij ∈Xi}.
2. S1 and S2 run (JcK(1); JcK(2)) ←FCaPSI( e
X1; e
X2), and output JcK(i) respectively.
servers correctly execute FCaPSI. Since the PRF is evaluated under a uniformly
random secret key, the probability of such collisions is negligible.
The simulation for a corrupted party Pi is immediate, as parties receive no
output and send only a single message to their respective server.
If instead a server is corrupted, say S1, the simulator generates the message
from P1 to S1 by sending |X1| uniformly random strings. It then provides S1
with its output share, as specified by the ideal functionality. Any distinguisher
for S1 that can distinguish the simulated message from the real one can be used
to break the pseudorandomness of Φ.
⊓⊔
4.2
Analytics over Pairwise Intersections
We define a new cryptographic primitive called aggregated pairwise cardinality
private set intersection, PWPSI-Aggin short. Briefly, this is a functionality with
n clients and two servers. The input provided by client Pi is a list of n −1
sets (Xi
j)j∈[n],j̸=i, while the servers do not provide any input the functionality
computes computes s = P
i<j |Xi
j ∩Xj
i |, which is secret shared and sent to the
two servers.
Protocol Description. The protocol for analytics over pairwise intersections
uses as a building block a protocol for outsourced cardinality PSI parametrized
with a linear secret sharing scheme over Zq for q > 2n. The idea of the protocol
is rather easy. For each couple Pi, Pj they run an ΠCaOPSI-SS with the servers S1
and S2 where the clients Pi, Pj inputs the sets Xi
j, Xj
i , such a protocol execution

8
Alborch et al.
Functionality 3 FPWPSI-Agg
Inputs. Each party Pi for i ∈[n] inputs a set of sets of elements Xi = {Xi
j}j̸=i, the
servers S1, S2 input nothing.
Outputs. The parties Pi output nothing, the servers S1, S2 output a secret sharing JsK
where:
s =
n
X
i<j
|Xi
j ∩Xj
i |.
Leakage. If a server Si is corrupted, the adversary receives |Xi
j| for any i, j.
outputs a secret share Jci
jK to the servers. At the end, the servers aggregate all
the outputs computing P
i,jJci
jK. The formal description is in Protocol 2.
Correctness and Security. We prove correctness and security of ΠPWPSI-Agg.
Theorem 2. Protocol ΠPWPSI-Agg presented in Protocol 2 correctly and se-
curely realizes the ideal functionality FPWPSI-Agg in the FCaOPSI-SS-hybrid model
against a semi-honest adversary, assuming that the linear secret sharing scheme
is correct and holds secrecy.
Proof. Let us start with correctness. Due to the correctness of FCaOPSI-SS we
know that Jci
jK(1), Jci
jK(2) are 2-out-of-2 linear secret shares of |Xi
j ∩Xj
i |. Then,
due to the linearity of the secret sharing scheme we know that
JsK = P
i<jJci
jK =
rPn
i<j ci
j
z
= JPn
i<j |Xi
j ∩Xj
i |K.
For security, the simulator description is straightforward, as the protocol only
invokes the ideal functionality FCaOPSI-SS.
If one of the servers S1, S2 is corrupted, say S1, the simulator must generate
the partial shares Jci
jK(1) for all i < j. We notice that all shares Jci
jK can be set
to shares of 0. By the privacy of the secret sharing scheme, the simulated and
real views are indistinguishable.
We remark that the security argument covers the case where one of the
parties in {P1, . . . , Pn, S1, S2} is corrupted and S is corrupted. Thus, the access
structure in the corruption model differs slightly from the one stated (as it is
more general). However, this discrepancy can be resolved by identifying S with
S1, matching the corruption model assumed in the theorem.
⊓⊔
5
Construction for Mail Analytics
In this section, we show how to apply PWPSI-Agg to the use case of privacy-
preserving mail analytics in a large corporate group. We first formalize the class

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
9
Protocol 2 ΠPWPSI-Agg
Inputs: Each party Pi inputs a set of n −1 sets of elements Xi = {Xi
j}j̸=i.
Outputs: Each party Pi outputs nothing. The server S outputs
s =
n
X
i<j
|Xi
j ∩Xj
i |.
The protocol:
1. For every i, j with i < j, the parties Pi and Pj send respectively Xi
j and Xj
i to
the FCaOPSI-SS, the servers receive secret shares Jci
jK from the ideal functionality.
2. Each server Sk for k ∈{1, 2} locally computes
JsK(k) =
n
X
i<j
Jci
jK(k),
and output their shares.
of queries, and then describe how to evaluate them using FPWPSI-Agg. We present
two variants of the protocol. The second variant additionally incorporates dif-
ferential privacy [11].
5.1
Defining the Use Case
Consider the use case of a large corporate telecommunications group, let us
call it Tangerine S.A., wanting to perform mail analytics over their work-force
sensitive HR information. Notably, the workers from Tangerine S.A. are divided
into different subsidiaries, which are independent juridic entities (for example,
being based in different countries). This means that the HR information of the
workers is stored by their respective subsidiaries, and more importantly, due to
privacy regulations such as GDPR, they cannot be divulged in clear to any other
entities.
This setting severely complicates performing useful data analytics over email
flow by the headquarters of Tangerine S.A. (which for the purpose of this work
we will consider also as a separate juridic entity). For example, queries like
how many mails were sent from workers located on one time zone to another
during a certain time frame , the amount of mails sent from product manager
to developers in different locations , or the average size of mails sent from upper
hierarchy to the workers , become significantly more difficult when taking into
account mails between different subsidiaries.
More specifically, we assume a set of subsidiaries (or independent legal en-
tities) with each having access to two databases. The first one, is the private

10
Alborch et al.
ID
Gender
Location
Job Title
Workday
· · ·
1
F
Silicon Valley Product Manager
40 hpw
· · ·
2
M
Paris
Developer
35 hpw
· · ·
3
Other
Paris
Administrative
35 hpw
· · ·
4
M
Brussels
Developer
40 hpw
· · ·
...
...
...
...
...
...
(a) Private database with HR data.
Sender
S-Entity
Receiver
R-Entity
Metadata
7
A
38
F
M1
3
C
21
A
M2
54
A
15
A
M3
47
A
2
D
M4
...
...
...
...
...
(b) Mail log.
Fig. 1: Databases stored by subsidiary “A”.
database containing the HR information of their employees such as their gen-
der, location, job title or workday weekly hours. The second one is a mail log,
storing all mails either sent or received (or both) by an employee of that sub-
sidiary, including the ID and entity of both the sender and receiver as well as the
metadata of the mail. For an example of these databases, see Figure 1. In this
context, given a query by the company headquarters, the expected result would
be the sum of the cardinalities of the pairwise intersections of mail log databases
filtered appropriately with the respective private database through the policies
given by the query.
The previously proposed protocol for analytics over pairwise intersections is
especially suitable for this use case because:
– The number of mails exchanged daily may count in the hundreds of thou-
sands. Thus a solution involving third party-servers like in PWPSI-Agg is
scalable with respect to the size of the databases;
– The proposed PWPSI-Agg solution ensures that the partial cardinality re-
sults remain hidden. Disclosing these partial intersections can be a severe
privacy breach, for example in the case where some subsidiaries are small in
the number of employees.
– Tangerine S.A. is a multinational company, thus different subsidiaries might
have different office hours, since they are located in different geographical
areas. Therefore, outsourcing computation to two servers and minimizing
interaction among subsidiaries would definitely help in this context.
Remark 3. Despite the concreteness of this use case, the setup is equally applica-
ble to other scenarios where counting interactions between entities with respect
to different private filters is needed. For example, this same setup works for data
analytics over inter-entity bank transfers. In this situation the private database
will hold the confidential information of the clients while the logs will contain
the bank transfers. Then, controlling entities can privately analyze the transfer
flow without compromising the confidential information of the clients.
5.2
Pairwise Analytics with Additional Local Inputs
In addition to the result of common emails among pairwise subsidiaries, Tan-
gerine S.A. wishes to also consider the internal emails (emails sent between

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
11
workers of the same entity). To deal with this additional feature, each party
inputs an extra integer value vi, and each server outputs the sum of all these
values vi together with the cardinality of the pairwise intersections, i.e., s =
Pn
i=1 vi +Pn
i<j |Xi
j ∩Xj
i |. To account for this, in the protocol, during step 1 ev-
ery client generates 2-out-of-2 linear secret shares JviK(1), JviK(2) ←SS.Share(vi),
and sends to server Si their respective share. Then, at step 2, the servers compute
JsK(k) = Pn
i=1JviK(k) + Pn
i<jJci
jK(k).
5.3
Formal Definition of Query
We assume that the mail logs contain, for every mail, the sender’s and receiver’s
entity ID, the sender’s and receiver’s worker ID and the metadata of the mail.
The HR database contains, for every worker, their ID and k different definitional
fields (i.e. gender, location, job title, workday...). The queries give a time frame
from which to count mails as well as a subset of entities to focus in, and then
policies for each of the sender’s and receiver’s respective fields. In other words:
In time period T, how many mails are sent between a given subset E
of entities, from workers satisfying policy Pols
i for every field i ∈[k] and
received by workers satisfying policy Polr
i for every field i ∈[k].
With this characterization, we can say that any query is determined by the
tuple q = (T, E, {Pols
i, Polr
i }i∈[k]). The exact answer to such a query q is the
following integer value:
X
i,j∈E


m : ∧kPols
k(m.sender), m ∈Xi
j
m.time ∈T

∩

m : ∧kPolr
k(m.receiver), m ∈Xj
i
m.time ∈T

5.4
Instantiation from PWPSI-Agg
We explain how to properly build the sets of elements {Xi
j}j̸=i as well as the
values vi so that the output of FPWPSI-Agg is the desired query applied to the
mail logs and private HR databases. We discuss both cases where the analysis
is desired with differential privacy and without it.
Without DP. The sets {Xi
j}j̸=i are the mails sent between entities Pi and
Pj and satisfy the policies from the side of Pi, while vi corresponds to the
internal mails in party Pi satisfying the policies. More in details, first Pi goes
through its HR database, and creates a list of valid senders and receivers using
{Pols
ℓ, Polr
ℓ}ℓ∈[k]. Then, it goes through its mail logs, and for each internal email,
if both sender and receiver are in the lists, then the internal mail counter vi is
incremented by one. Finally, for each external email between Pi and Pj, if the
sender is in the list senders (analogously in the case of the receiver) then the
mail gets added to Xi
j. This data treatment together with FPWPSI-Agg gives the

12
Alborch et al.
Algorithm 1 Precomputation for party i. Parts in blue refer to steps unique to
the DP solution.
Input: Databases {MLi, HRi}i∈[n] referring to the mail log and private HR database
respectively, query q = (T, E, {Pols
j, Polr
j}j∈[k]), privacy parameters: privacy
budget ε, sensitivity ∆(maximum number of mails sent per worker)
Output: Output vi, {Xi
j}j̸=i
if i /∈E then
▷If party is not involved in the query abort
Abort
Set senders = receivers = ∅
for all worker ∈HRi do
▷Choose workers satisfying policy
Add worker to senders and receivers
for all j ∈[k] do
if field j does not satisfy Pols
j then
Remove worker from senders
if field j does not satisfy Polr
j then
Remove worker from receivers
Set vi = 0, Xi
j = ∅for all j ̸= i
for all j ∈[n], j ̸= i do
▷Build set Xi
j and internal emails
Set internal = 0
for all mail ∈MLi and time ∈T do
if sender entity = receiver entity = i then
▷Count internal mails
if sender ∈senders and receiver ∈receivers then
internal = internal + 1
else
▷Build Xi
j for all j ̸= i
if sender entity = i and sender ∈senders then
Add mail to Xi
j
else if receiver entity = i and receiver ∈receivers then
Add mail to Xi
j
vi = vi + internal
Let k = |E|
▷Add the DP noise
Sample zi ←SGDL(1/k, exp(−ε/∆))
vi = vi + zi
correct result, since for every email to be counted (i.e. email satisfying both
sender and receiver properties), if it is an internal email it is counted in vi, and
otherwise it appears in the intersection Xi
j ∩Xj
i for some j ̸= i. For a formal
description of this , see Algorithm 1.
With DP. Note that the sets {Xi
j}j̸=i and internal emails are computed as in
the previous paragraph. However, we need to add some noise distribution to vi
to satisfy differential privacy. More in details, let k be the number of entities
involved in the query (i.e. |E|), then Pi samples zi ←SGDL(1/k, exp(−ε/∆))
where ∆is the maximum number of mails sent per worker, and updates vi
by adding zi to it. This gives us the desired DP result, since the output of
FPWPSI-Agg gives the desired query result (analogously to the previous para-
graph) plus P
i∈E zi. Then, referring to Appendix A, by Lemma 1 we know that
P
i∈E zi ∼Geo(exp(−ε/∆)), which by Lemma 2 we know it is an (ε, 0)-DP mech-

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
13
anism. As such, we achieve a DP compliant protocol with negligible overcost,
with the only trade-off being in utility.
Remark 4. In this work we focus on feasibility, we use the most standard DP
mechanism for our scenario, which is the local geometric mechanism. The utility
could be improved by leveraging certain trade-offs depending on the specific
scenario, such as a trusted shuffler [10], prior knowledge about the distribution
of the data [6,3] or more accurate knowledge on the sensitivity of each query
[29].
Remark 5. One last open question is the way to choose the sensitivity ∆. This
parameter (only involved for the computations involving DP) is assumed to
be the maximum possible mails sent by one worker in a day. This, however,
may be difficult to parametrize in a real life scenario where some outliers may
send a substantially greater than the mean, having a significant impact on the
utility of the scheme. To avoid this, we can use the fact that the geometric
mechanism satisfies (ε, 0)-DP. Then, by setting ∆to be the maximum for most
of the employees, the outliers are covered by δ in (ε, δ)-DP.
6
Evaluation
6.1
Experimental setting
We have implemented1 our construction of PWPSI-Agg
for mail analytics in
Rust. We use the CPSI construction in [7] because of its high efficiency (both
asymptotically and concretely) and the existing two versions demonstrating its
flexibility in performance. To transform this solution into a CacPSI construction
we perform the standard transformation of swapping to arithmetic secret shares
and then locally add them all together (see Remark 1). To implement these pro-
tocols we use the swanky library [13] for oblivious transfer and oblivious transfer
extension, ands the voprf library [25] for oblivious pseudo-random functions.
Experiments are executed on a Intel Core Ultra 9 285K (24C/24T, 6.5 GHz,
AVX2), with 248 GB of RAM running Ubuntu 24.04 operating system, where
each auxiliary server Si is assigned 12 threads, and therefore up to 12 CaOPSI-SS
are run, concurrently.
6.2
Performance Analysis
Scalability Experiment. The first analysis consists of the scalability of our
construction with respect to the number of entities on the one side and the
number of employees per entity, on the other side. The query involves all entities
and the policy for senders (as well as for receivers) is sampled at random by
taking 75% of them. For the scalability experiment with respect to the number
of entities, we fix the number of employees per entity to 30 and vary the number
1 Code available in open-source upon acceptance.

14
Alborch et al.
# Entities Offline time (s) Online time (s) # pairs Online time (s) Comm. (KB)
(Sequential)
(Parallel)
3
0.71
89.28
3
35.16
4.07
4
1.367
130.85
6
27.74
6.84
5
2.20
161.95
10
23.12
10.09
6
3.68
202.68
15
18.68
11.83
7
5.56
254.47
21
18.39
15.41
(a) Scaling with respect to entities. All entities have 30 employees.
Employees per entity Offline time (s) Online time (s) Online time (s) Comm. (KB)
(Sequential)
(Parallel)
30
0.75
95.20
36.93
4.37
40
0.72
90.05
33.96
4.25
50
0.74
98.74
38.51
4.25
60
0.69
96.95
40.67
4.18
70
0.74
86.70
33.54
4.53
(b) Scaling with respect to number of employees per entity. All experiments are with 3
entities.
Table 1: Scalability experiment for our mail solution.
of entities, while for the scalability experiment with respect to the number of
employees per entity, we fix the number of entities to 3 and vary the over the
number of employees. This setting ensures that in both experiments the total
number of employees remains the same at the same row in Tables 1a and 1b.
In Table 1 shows the performance results with respect to these two experi-
ments. The sequential online time is evaluated assuming that all executions of
CaOPSI-SS are performed one after the other and the parallelized online time
is evaluated assuming an idealized scenario where all CaOPSI-SS executions can
be run in parallel (i.e. it shows the slowest individual CaOPSI-SS execution). As
expected, we observe that the sequential online computational time for PWPSI-
Agg is much more sensitive to the increasing of the number of equal-sized entities
than to the increasing of the amount of employees per entity. However, we no-
tice a steady decrease in the parallel computational time. This is due to the fact
that as the number of entities increase, the number of emails exchanged pairwise
decreases, since the number of pairs increases quadratically while the amount of
mails only increases linearly. Consequently, the growth we see in online compu-
tational time for PWPSI-Agg is sub-quadratic.
Additionally, we also consider two well-known scenarios: cross-silo (where
few very large and computationally powerful entities interact) and cross-device
(where many small and computationally-constrained entities interact). Applied
to our use-case, we define 15,000 employees, which are distributed to 3 entities in
the cross-silo scenario, and to 100 entities in the cross-device one. In Table 2, we
remark that the cross-device scenario incurs better computation time since the
size of the pairwise sets tends to 0 whereas the cross-silo scenario becomes more

Outsourced PSI for Pairwise Analytics
15
Scenario
Offline time (s) Online time (s) # pairs Online time (s) Comm. (KB)
(Sequential)
(Parallel)
Cross-silo
2.57
2 829.69
3
1 012.24
59.91
Cross-device
1 351.47
609.74
4 950†
7.39
1 360
†Note that most pairs have empty sets and as such are not executed.
Table 2: Cross-silo versus cross-device comparison.
Offline time (s) Online time (s) # pairs Online time (s) Comm. (KB)
(Sequential)
(Parallel)
1 306.73
776.61
4 950†
44.82
11 930
†Note that most pairs have empty sets and as such are not executed.
Table 3: Experiments over a realistic synthetic dataset.
efficient in terms of communication cost. This is due to the increased advantage
of oblivious transfer extension when more oblivious transfers are needed.
Realistic Experiment. The second experiment aims at evaluating the feasi-
bility of the solution using a synthetic dataset modeling the traffic of a large
telecommunication corporate group (for more details on the generation of this
dataset see Appendix C). In particular, we analyze a more realistic policy for
the query: in particular, we randomly sample at 10%, each possible field for both
receiver and sender. The performance results are shown in Table 3. We observe
that more than half of the execution time is reserved for offline computation, cor-
responding to the setup for all the oblivious transfer extensions between S1 and
S2 and this can easily be performed before-hand. The online-time, on the other
hand is measured as 10 minutes which seems reasonable for a privacy-preserving
query over mail traffic scenario in a corporate group with over 100,000 workers.
7
Conclusion
This work leaves the door open to interesting future research. For example, a
construction of PWPSI-Agg without the use of auxiliary servers is an interesting
open problem, as well as dealing with the malicious security case. On the more
practical side, PWPSI-Agg does not provide a framework to perform other data
analytics than counting, for example, analysis over the size of the mails is left as a
difficult open problem. Finally, at the implementation level, due to the disparity
in sizes of databases (few big entities and a lot of small ones) a mix of balanced
CaCPSI architecture (where the cost grows linearly with the size of both sets)
like [7] and unbalanced CaCPSI architecture (where the cost grows linearly with
the size of the small set and sublinearly with the size of the big set) like [18]
would be ideal, as well as adding parallelization at the CaCPSI level.

16
Alborch et al.