Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
Enis Golaszewski
golaszewski@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Neal Krawetz
krawetz26@hackerfactor.com
Hacker Factor
Fort Collins, Colorado, USA
Alan T. Sherman
sherman@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Edward Zieglar
evziegl@uwe.nsa.gov
National Security Agency
Fort George G. Meade, Maryland
USA
Sai K. Matukumalli
smatuku1@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Roberto Yus
ryus@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Carson L. Kegley
ckegley1@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Michael Barthel
mbarthe1@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
William Bowman
wbowman4@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Bharg Barot
bhargvb1@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Kaur Kullman
kak@umbc.edu
Univ. of Maryland, Balt. Cnty. (UMBC)
Baltimore, Maryland, USA
Abstract
Generative AI and advanced editing tools enable malicious actors
to create high-quality fake images that can facilitate fraud, attack
reputations, and manipulate elections. We analyze security proper-
ties of the Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity (C2PA)
digital provenance system. C2PA binds cryptographic assertions
of provenance to a digital asset, with the goal of assisting users
to judge the asset’s provenance. When generating or modifying
a digital asset, a C2PA claim generator (e.g., camera) creates and
signs provenance data. Using a trusted timestamping authority
the generator optionally timestamps them and places them into a
manifest of claims.
We analyze three C2PA components: specifications (Version 2.2),
selected claim validator implementations, and conformance pro-
gram (Version 0.1). For the specifications, we state the security goals
specified by C2PA (i.e., tamper-evidence of claims and weak file
integrity) and identify additional essential goals that should be re-
quired (i.e., timestamp agreement, validator consistency, and strong
file integrity). We review major policies (e.g., validation logic, certifi-
cate revocation), examine the protocol’s composition with RFC 3161
trusted timestamps, and carry out the first formal-methods analysis
of the core protocol. For the implementations, we identify security
flaws through validation experiments using public C2PA assets and
ones we created. For the conformance program, we review avail-
able public conformance documents and assess two conforming
validators: Adobe Inspect and Verifieddit.
We show that the C2PA specifications and their conforming im-
plementations fail to achieve their claimed security goals. Further-
more, they also fail to achieve essential additional goals, which all
such provenance systems require for trustworthy deployment. First,
our formal-methods analysis shows that C2PA claim generators and
validators fail to agree on the claim signature’s trusted timestamp.
Consequently, a claim may exist with competing, fraudulent times-
tamps, which cast doubt on the related asset’s provenance. Second,
we show that the specification’s inadequate certificate revocation
policies result in serious vulnerabilities, violating all security goals.
As a result, public validators, including Adobe Inspect, accept C2PA
manifests signed by known, compromised Nikon certificates. Third,
our experiments reveal inconsistencies among current conforming
validator implementations. For some assets, implementations fail to
produce the same validation result: users who rely on these imple-
mentations may arrive at contradictory conclusions regarding an
asset’s provenance. Fourth, we discuss implications of the specifica-
tion’s “exclusion range,” which identifies portions of the content
and manifest that are not protected by the cryptographic signature,
allowing undetectable alterations which can mislead analysts. Fifth,
the C2PA conformance program certifies products without carrying
out a technical review of the product, including the source code, and
without defining security requirements for conforming validators.
Our results show that the specifications and the current imple-
mented C2PA ecosystem do not yet provide the guarantees required
for reliable deployment or standards adoption. We suggest ways
to strengthen C2PA, including a verified improvement to the core
protocol’s timestamping. The Pixel 10 Pro and Version 2.3 of the
specifications implemented some of our suggestions.
1
Introduction
The ubiquity of AI has rapidly lowered the cost of producing per-
suasive, high-quality synthetic media [1, 2]. A single actor can
fabricate images that appear to depict real events, real people, and

Golaszewski et al.
real documents, at a scale and fidelity that strains human judgment
and existing forensic tooling. The downstream harms are well un-
derstood: fraud enabled by counterfeit evidence, reputation attacks,
and political manipulation through fabricated content [3, 4]. In
response, some organizations now incorporate provenance signals—
machine-verifiable metadata intended to help audiences and plat-
forms determine where, when, and how an asset was created or
edited. The Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity (C2PA)
system [5] is rapidly emerging as the dominant tool for digital me-
dia provenance, yet its actual security guarantees remain poorly
understood. We show that the C2PA specifications and ecosystem
fail to achieve their stated or essential security goals.
C2PA’s approach is not a single cryptographic primitive but
an ecosystem-scale system involving generators, validators, and
a conformance program. This system includes protocols for bind-
ing assertions to a digital asset, signing and timestamping, valida-
tor behavior, signing certificate and revocation management, and
user-facing presentations (Section 2). This system introduces an
extended level of complexity and a wide surface for potential ex-
ploitation (Sections 5–6): the provenance must be robust to deter
misattribution and alterations, validate consistently, and accommo-
date diverse deployment environments, incremental adoption, and
privacy constraints.
In practice, the C2PA specifications and ecosystem fail at pro-
viding such provenance (Section 3,F). Security properties that seem
intuitive at the marketing level (e.g., “this photo is authentic” or
“this timestamp proves when the photo was taken”) can fail in subtle
ways when considering attacker capabilities, incomplete implemen-
tations, ambiguous validation guidance, or diverging trust policies.
C2PA’s approach also introduces privacy concerns (Section H).
Despite the misleading presence of the word “authenticity” in
its name and exaggerated suggestions in its promotional materials
(e.g., [6]), C2PA is a mechanism for provenance, not authenticity.
Provenance refers to the origin and modifications of a digital asset
(e.g., what device created or modified it, where, and when). Au-
thenticity refers to difficult-to-define properties (what the C2PA
specifications refer to as “value judgments”) of the asset, such as
“Is it real versus fake”, “Is it true?”, or “Does it faithfully represent
something that happened in the real world?” (Section 10).1 The
C2PA specifications admonish users not to infer any value judg-
ments from C2PA claims associated with a digital asset. Instead,
the specifications promise only that C2PA validators can detect
tampering of assertions using a cryptographically signed claim and
a weak notion of file integrity.
In Section 5, we point out that the specifications are remiss in
not also including important and achievable additional validator
consistency. Figure 3 shows that even conforming validators can
yield contradictory results. We also point out how to achieve more
robust file integrity (Sections 8,13).
With substantial institutional momentum (Section 2), the C2PA
provenance mechanism is being adopted and deployed in produc-
tion [7, 8]. It is the approach that platforms, journalists, and end
users are most likely to encounter today.
1The C2PA specifications use the noun “authenticity” in a nonstandard narrow way to
mean the verification of a digital signature (authentication).
While academic work proposes alternate primitives for prove-
nance (e.g., watermarking [9], trusted-hardware-based pipelines
[10]), real-world provenance is an ecosystem problem that depends
on more than cryptographic soundness. It also depends on specifica-
tions and engineering details, interoperability across tools, trust and
revocation management, validator policy, and user-facing presenta-
tion. Attackers will target deployed systems, and defenders must
understand what guarantees the C2PA specifications do (and do
not) provide. Accordingly, we analyze the C2PA specifications and
ecosystem as implemented and validated in the wild, emphasizing
the gap between conformance and effective assurance.
Our analysis focuses on the security of C2PA 2.2 across design,
implementation, and use. We evaluate the C2PA specifications, in-
cluding their normative requirements, validation guidelines, trust
management, privacy considerations, and RFC 3161 timestamp
integration. We analyze the specifications focusing on content cre-
dentials (Cr) (Section 4), but exclude soft-bindings or auxiliary tech-
nologies, which are currently unimplemented. We complement
this specification-level analysis with empirical validator experi-
ments. We also examine a deployed implementation: the Google
Pixel 10 Pro C2PA pipeline, which C2PA currently lists as a con-
forming product at the maximum assurance level. Our approach
is not merely to identify isolated bugs, but to understand whether
C2PA—as deployed—provides the consistency and evidentiary value
that users and platforms require.
To our knowledge, our work is the first comprehensive security
analysis of C2PA and the first formal-methods analysis of its un-
derlying cryptographic protocols. Our analysis is challenging in
part because the C2PA specifications are expansive, complex, and
evolving. Version 2.2 of the specifications has 248 pages, and there
are over 20 associated documents totaling over 2,500 pages, not
including source code or descriptions of related standards needed
for implementation (e.g., JUMBF, JPEG, PNG, XMP, and EXIF). The
protocol operates in a broad ecosystem with many diverse players;
it interacts with the RFC 3161 timestamping protocol; and protocol
analysis is inherently complex.
Experience shows that there is great value in formal-methods
analysis of cryptographic protocols, including in the design phases,
because humans are poorly suited to analyze their complex nuanced
security properties and their many possible execution sequences.
Assuming valid public-key certificates, our formal-methods sym-
bolic analysis proves strong agreement on a claim signature, but not
on the signature’s trusted timestamp. In practice, however, neither
this tamper-evident property of claims—nor any of the security
goals—holds because conforming validators accept revoked, mali-
cious certificates (Figure 4). Failure to agree on a claim signature’s
trusted timestamp enables adversaries to modify or replace times-
tamps without detection, undermining provenance. We discovered
this timestamp vulnerability through our formal-methods analysis
and demonstrate it in Figure 2.
As Kocher [11] explains, when any security system that uses
public-key infrastructure accepts revoked signing certificates, the
system risks permitting an adversary to defeat all security goals.
Violating best practices, the C2PA specifications permit validators
to skip checking for revoked signing certificates (e.g., certificates
corresponding to compromised private-keys). In a prudent effort
to balance privacy and security, the specifications intentionally

Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
make this egregious design choice. The specifications [5, Section
15.9] permit validators optionally to perform certificate revocation
checks, but only with the Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP),
which compromises privacy (Section H). While safeguarding pri-
vacy is an important consideration, skipping revocation checks is
unacceptable, and using certificate revocation lists (CRLs) would
yield a better privacy-security tradeoff. Figure 4 illustrates a serious
consequence of this major vulnerability of the C2PA specifications.
Our contributions include: (1) Evaluating the C2PA specifications
holistically, including requirements, validation guidance, trust man-
agement, privacy considerations, and integration with RFC 3161
timestamping. (2) Formalizing C2PA security goals (tamper-evidence
and weak file integrity) and identifying essential additions: times-
tamp agreement, validator consistency, and strong file integrity.
(3) Performing the first formal-methods analysis of C2PA proto-
cols using the Cryptographic Protocol Shapes Analyzer (CPSA) [12].
(4) Presenting examples of digital assets that violate one or more
of the C2PA security goals stated in the paper. For each asset’s Cr,
we analyze the assertions and evaluate the claim by using multi-
ple public validators. (5) Assessing the conformance program and
the inconsistency between conforming validators: Adobe’s Content
Authenticity Inspect and Sanmarcsoft’s Verifieddit. (6) Proposing
concrete specifications and ecosystem changes based on our find-
ings.
The Pixel 10 Pro and C2PA Version 2.3 incorporated some of our
recommendations. Version 2.4 (April 2026) does not address any of
our concerns.
All of our artifacts are available on GitHub [13], including our
CPSA input models and output shapes. Several appendices provide
additional detailed information, including: acronyms and abbrevia-
tions (Appendix C), ladder diagrams of the core protocol and our
improvement of it (D), formal-methods analysis of security goals
S1, S2, S3, S5 (E), three additional examples demonstrating C2PA
vulnerabilities (F), discussion (G), privacy considerations (H), CPSA
source code snippets (J), and an example of a C2PA validator and
manifest (K).
2
Overview of the C2PA Ecosystem
The Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity (C2PA) [5]
addresses misinformation by specifying the framework and man-
agement of digital asset provenance. Founded in 2021, the C2PA
initiative was originally led by Adobe and Microsoft, with addi-
tional steering committee members including Arm, Intel, Truepic,
and the BBC [14]. In 2024, the steering committee expanded to
include Google [15], Meta [16], and Amazon [17]. It now reports
more than 300 general members, spanning device manufacturers,
media organizations, and security-focused companies. Interest is
not limited to industry: in January 2025, the U.S. National Secu-
rity Agency, the Australian Signals Directorate’s Australian Cyber
Security Centre, the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security, and the
U.K. National Cyber Security Centre jointly released guidance on
content credentials and emphasized the importance of widespread
adoption [18]. Despite widespread interest in this problem space,
many participating organizations, including some on the steering
committee, have not yet deployed C2PA-enabled solutions or have
only limited pilot implementations.
Figure 1: C2PA ecosystem involving users, generators, val-
idators, timestamp authorities, and certificate authorities.
Components may register with the conformance program.
The C2PA organization provides the specifications and related
services, including the authoritative certificate list, official list of
protocol references (bindings), and conforming products list. C2PA
works closely with the Adobe-provided Content Authenticity Initia-
tive (CAI) [19], which functions as the outreach branch for C2PA
and provides working implementations, including c2patool [20] and
the Content Authenticity Verify online validator [21].
Components. The C2PA ecosystem involves content generators,
validators, users, a trusted timestamp authority (TSA), a certificate
authority (CA), and a product conformance program (Figure 1).
The C2PA specifications employ a system called Content Creden-
tials (Cr), which combines X.509-based cryptographic signatures
with structured provenance information (referred to as claims or
assertions). C2PA’s security considerations [22] define a trust model
in which the user assumes that the signed assertions were gener-
ated by the signer. This trust model makes no judgment concerning
the veracity of the assertions. Types of permissible assertions have
evolved across versions of the C2PA specifications. Early versions
(February 2021 to May 2025) allowed user-supplied and unverified
data to be co-mingled with verified information.
Assertions. We analyze Version 2.2 of the specifications (May
2025) [5]. C2PA 2.2 distinguishes between created and gathered as-
sertions. Created assertions originate from trusted sources, through
vetted hardware or software. Gathered assertions derive from un-
verified sources, such as user-provided names or organizational in-
formation. Because trusted hardware capable of generating reliable
metadata are not yet widely available, most attributes, including
image contents, lens settings, GPS coordinates, and timestamps, are
currently recorded as gathered assertions.
Exclusions. Each assertion is cryptographically hashed and signed
using an X.509 signature. This process provides identity attribution,
cryptographic validation, and tamper detection for the signed data.
In addition, the asset file and manifest are hashed and signed, but
this protection omits the “exclusion range” (set of bit positions) of
these data. The specifications are remarkably permissive in what
may be excluded: “the claim generator shall ensure the exclusion

Golaszewski et al.
range only contains content from C2PA Manifest Store, or asset meta-
data (e.g., EXIF, IPTC metadata).” Consequently, an adversary can
modify bits in the asset’s metadata or tamper with the asset’s man-
ifest store without invalidating the claim signature. For this reason,
C2PA’s claimed security goal of file integrity is very weak (Sec-
tion 5).
The specifications omit claim manifests from the hash of an
asset’s metadata, enabling an adversary to tamper with the order
and contents of the asset’s manifest store. This omission is necessary
to resolve a circular dependency: a claim manifest resides within the
asset, but the asset’s hash value resides within the claim manifest.
We uncovered two potential issues resulting from this policy. First,
an adversary who modifies the manifest store, such as reordering or
removing claim manifests, violates the asset’s overall file integrity
(Section 5). Second, changes to the ordering of claim manifests
result in errors and crashes in validating software (Section 13.1).
C2PA’s rationale [23] for allowing an exclusion range is based on
privacy: it would like to allow a user to redact private information
(e.g., GPS location) from an asset’s metadata after asset generation.
C2PA’s intent is to allow content anonymization after signing and
without requiring resigning—a feature that prioritizes editorial
flexibility over strict data integrity. In Sections 8,13, we propose a
more robust way involving additional signatures to navigate this
tension between provenance and privacy.
Auxiliary technologies. The C2PA organization recommends
pairing Cr with auxiliary technologies, such as watermarking and
fingerprinting. These auxiliary approaches lie outside the scope of
this paper, which focuses on the Cr mechanism.
Verifying content credentials. Validator tools help users analyze
manifests of digital assets by examining the Cr. Given the complex-
ity and relative newness of C2PA, there are few publicly-available
validators. The most complete is c2patool [20] by the CAI. This
command-line tool validates signatures and supports inserting and
extracting Cr metadata. Due to current rapid release cycles [20], dif-
ferent versions of the tool may generate different validation results
for the same C2PA-signed media. As of March 2026, the following
web-based validators include:
• Content Authenticity Inspect [24] by Adobe offers the most
up-to-date of the available web-based tools. The current
version displays only minimal certificate and created asser-
tion information. Certificate chains and some unverified
assertions are not reported. Moreover, it does not support
older versions of the C2PA specifications—images signed
six months ago may not be verifiable.
• Verify [21] by the CAI [25] is similar to Adobe’s Inspect,
but appears to be a few revisions older and not updated as
frequently.
• ProofCheck [26] by ProofMode determines whether media
contains a Cr record, but performs very little verification.
It readily displays user-supplied untrusted information as
verified.
• Verifieddit [27] by Sanmarcsoft, a CAI member, displays
more details than any other validator, including raw output
similar to c2patool.
There are and have been other web-based C2PA validators, but
these are often left unmaintained after an initial period of enthusi-
astic support, while others have already been taken offline, includ-
ing Truepic’s Content Credentials and Microsoft’s Content Integrity
services. Among the web-based validators that we list, Content Au-
thenticity Inspect and Verifieddit are on the conforming products
list. In addition, the conforming products list [28] includes other
validators that are not publicly accessible.
Between the rapidly evolving specifications, lack of regular main-
tenance, and updating for validation options, there are significant
inconsistencies between the available validation tools. A single
signed picture may generate contradictory results depending on
the tool used and when it was used (Figure 3).
Conformance program. The C2PA conformance program pro-
vides a list of conforming products. These signature generators,
devices, and validators have been reviewed by the conformance
program and found to comply with the specifications. There are
currently two assurance levels: Level 1 focuses on the correct im-
plementation of the C2PA protocol and typically relies on software-
based protections for the signing keys. Level 2 focuses on hardware-
backed security solutions. Achieving an assurance level does not
mean that the implementation is correct or complete: the current
C2PA review process evaluates only product descriptions, not soft-
ware or hardware implementations.
Provided as a JSON-encoded file [29], the conforming product
list includes specification versions and assurance levels. We found
no evidence, however, that any of the available products check
the conformance list. Hence, non-technical end-users may find
it difficult to determine if a valid signature is from a conforming
product or if the validator is a conforming product. Moreover, users
cannot easily discern the specification version in their media, nor if
a validator is equipped to process assets from conflicting versions.
The Google Pixel 10 family of smartphones were the first devices
to receive Assurance Level 2 [8]. This designation means that the
keys are protected by hardware-backed security, and an end-user
can reliably determine that the media was signed by a Pixel 10.
However, the Pixel 10’s implementation includes many limitations—
a strong signature around untrusted data does not make the data
more trustworthy.
In December 2025, the conforming products list [29] included
five validators, including Adobe Inspect. As of March 2026, CAI’s
c2patool and Verify were not listed.
3
Examples of Security Failures
We present three representative examples that illustrate how the
C2PA specifications and ecosystem fail to achieve any of security
goals SG1–SG5 stated in Section 5. Each example features a digital
asset with an associated Cr. Example 1—a generative AI output
with a substituted timestamp—shows that validators cannot identify
trusted timestamp alterations, violating SG3 (timestamp agreement).
This failure results from the specifications not binding a claim to
its signed timestamp. Example 2—a generative AI output (from
ChatGPT-4o) using an earlier C2PA version—demonstrates that
validators can produce inconsistent results, violating SG4 (validator
consistency). Example 3—a well-known camera forgery produced by
generative AI—illustrates that validators can accept altered images

Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
when they are signed by a revoked certificate. Because conforming
C2PA validators can accept revoked certificates, C2PA does not
satisfy any of the five security goals: using revoked or compromised
certificates, adversaries can modify claims and any bits of asset files
without detection.
For each example, we identify compromised security goals, an-
alyze what information can be extracted from the Cr claims, and
explain how public online C2PA validators interpret and present the
Cr to end users. We also discuss potential security hazards resulting
from these failures.
To verify a Cr, we followed the four-step validator workflow:
(1) determine the Cr’s C2PA specification version, (2) ensure that the
Cr complies with the corresponding C2PA specifications, (3) verify
the claim’s hash.data assertion matches the image data, and (4) au-
thenticate each claim’s signature and (if present) the timestamp.
Table 1 summarizes the contradictory results we obtained from
conforming validators by CAI [21] and Verifieddit [27], and from
validators by Adobe [24] and ProofMode [26], which (as of March 24,
2026) were not listed on the conforming products list. We performed
all computations using the validator’s web interfaces.
For additional examples, see Appendix F.
3.1
Example 1: Timestamp Replacement
Example 1 (Figure 2) shows that conforming validators fail to detect
replaced timestamps, violating SG3. The image is a JPEG photo of a
vehicle that was generated using Microsoft’s Azure OpenAI Image-
Gen. The example includes a Cr with a new timestamp replacing
the claim signature’s original timestamp. To replace the timestamp
we developed a custom tool [30]. This example also illustrates that
conforming validators do not identify when images are created by
generators that are not on the conforming products list.
The Cr in this example comprises a single signed claim with a
corresponding signature timestamp. The claim contains two asser-
tions: (1) a hard-binding c2pa.hash.boxes assertion to the underlying
asset, and (2) a created c2pa.actions.v2 assertion that Azure OpenAI
ImageGen created the image on February 23, 2026. The modified
claim signature states that the Microsoft Corporation signed the
claim on March 20, 2026. The original signature, however, is from
February 23; the March date is from our substituted timestamp that
used the DigiCert TSA (a conforming CA).
As of March 24, 2026, Azure OpenAI ImageGen does not appear
on C2PA’s public conformance lists. The four validators indicate,
however, that the photo’s Cr is valid, including the replaced times-
tamp. Verifieddit indicates that the Cr is valid, but indicates that
the signer (Microsoft) is untrusted on both the original and altered
files. We theorize that Verifieddit restricts itself to certificates in the
public conformance trust list. CAI, Adobe, and ProofMode continue
to acknowledge entries on the interim trust list (ITL), which the
CAI froze on January 1, 2026. ProofMode is the only tested valida-
tor that marked the picture as not being AI generated. As a result,
validators disagree on whether to trust the signing certificate and
whether it is AI. Each of the validators incorrectly attribute the
trusted timestamp to Microsoft, instead of DigiCert.
Example 1 illustrates four issues. (1) It demonstrates that an
adversary can replace a timestamp on a claim signature without de-
tection. Consequently, the adversary can cast doubt on the time at
Asset: Manifest:urn:uuid:28f643a1...
1 Assertion:c2pa.actions.v2
Action: "c2pa.created"
Software Agent:
"Azure OpenAI ImageGen"
Time: 2026-02-23T13:00:06Z
2 Assertion:c2pa.hash.boxes
3 Signature:
Issuer: "Microsoft Corporation"
Time: "2026-03-20T14:28:33+00:00"
Figure 2: A C2PA-enabled photo generated by Microsoft’s
Azure OpenAI ImageGen. We replaced the photo’s original
claim signature timestamp (applied by Microsoft) with a re-
placement timestamp which we obtained from a legitimate
TSA (Digicert). Violating SG3, none of the validators tested
identified the replaced timestamp or the discrepancy between
the image creation date (February 23) and the signature date
(March 20).
which a claim generator signed a claim. Aided by the “optional” re-
vocation checking (see Example 3), an adversary that compromises
a trusted TSA (or pushes a malicious TSA through the conformance
program) may replace a legitimate timestamp with a fraudulent,
back-dated timestamp, enabling them to discredit a legitimate Cr.
(2) Validators—including conforming validators—return inconsis-
tent results for the same media. (3) The conformance program does
not specify which trust lists validators must use, and permits alter-
nate trust lists, including deprecated trust lists containing revoked,
expired, or malicious certificates (Section 3.3). (4) Validators do not
identify which trust lists they use.
3.2
Example 2: Inconsistent Validators
Example 2 (Figure 3) illustrates that conforming validators can
produce contradictory results, violating SG4. OpenAI’s GPT-4o
generated this image of a lantern. The image is not malicious but
confuses validators for three reasons: (1) The image uses an older
version of C2PA that predates Version 2.2 and the conformance pro-
gram. (2) The image incorporates a Cr with nested claims that lack
claim signature timestamps. (3) The claim signatures correspond to
an expired (Truepic) root certificate.
The image’s Cr comprises two claims: an outer active claim
that provides provenance for the image’s thumbnail, and an inner
claim for the full-sized image. Neither claim signature incorporates
a signed timestamp. The active claim includes three assertions:
(1) c2pa.thumbnail.ingredient.jpeg, which incorporates binary data
for a thumbnail corresponding to the image, (2) c2pa.hash.data, a
hard-binding to the underlying asset, and (3) c2pa.ingredient.v3,
an assertion that the thumbnail corresponds to the inner claim’s
image. The inner claim includes a created c2pa.actions.v2 asser-
tion indicating two actions. First, GPT-4o generated the full-sized
image. Second, the OpenAI API applied some unspecified conver-
sion to the image. Finally, the outer claim includes a hard-binding
c2pa.hash.data assertion to the image data. OpenAI signed both
claims, but omitted trusted timestamps. Each claim signature is
currently expired and invalid.
Attempting to validate this Cr produces contradictory results:
ProofMode states that the Cr is valid; CAI and Adobe fail to detect
the Cr; and Verifieddit states correctly that the signing certificates

Golaszewski et al.
Table 1: Verification results for three image-manifest examples that illustrate how the C2PA system fails to achieve any of
the security goals. The rightmost four columns show results from conforming validators by Adobe and Verifieddit, and from
validators by CAI and ProofMode, which are not on the conforming products list. In Example 1, none of the validators recognize
that the timestamp was swapped, violating security goal SG3. In Example 2, validators produce inconsistent results on this
valid image, violating SG4. In Example 3, three of the validators fail to detect that the forged image was signed by a revoked
signature certificate, violating SG1–SG5.
Ex.
Description
Version
Media Age
Adobe
Verifieddit
CAI
ProofMode
1
GenAI with Swapped Timestamp
2.2
1 month
Valid, AI
Valid, Untrusted, AI
Valid, AI
Valid, Not AI
2
ChatGPT-4o, No Timestamp
2.x
7 months
Not Found
Expired
Not Found
Valid, Not AI
3
Nikon Z6 III Camera Forgery
2.x
6 months
Valid, Not AI
Invalid, Untrusted
Valid, Not AI
Valid, Not AI
Asset: Manifest:urn:c2pa:02c9d2ff-...
1 Assertion:c2pa.thumbnail...
2 Assertion:c2pa.ingredient.v3
Title: "image.png"
Relationship: "componentOf"
3 Assertion:c2pa.hash.data
4 Manifest:urn:c2pa:93190d09-...
Title: "image.png"
4a Assertion:c2pa.actions.v2
Action1: "c2pa.created",
SoftwareAgent: "GPT-4o"
Action2: "c2pa.converted",
SoftwareAgent: "OpenAI API"
4b Assertion:c2pa.hash.data
4c Signature:
Issuer: "OpenAI", Time: null
5 Signature:
Issuer: "OpenAI", Time: null
Figure 3: A lantern graphic generated by ChatGPT-4o to-
gether with a corresponding simplified C2PA claim manifest.
The validators we tested returned contradictory results, vi-
olating SG4. Assertion 1 defines a thumbnail image for the
claim, which validators may display to the user. Assertion 2
indicates that the asset includes an ingredient, for which
there is an ingredient claim manifest. The ingredient mani-
fest 4 indicates that GPT-4o created the original image, and
that OpenAI API converted the image to its current format.
OpenAI signed the claim and the ingredient claim. Neither
claim signature has a timestamp.
are expired. ProofMode and Verifieddit fail to indicate that OpenAI
is not on the conforming products list. This example highlights
a problematic future for aged Crs: users will be unable to verify
them due to expired certificates, outdated Cr formats, and missing
timestamps.
3.3
Example 3: Revoked Certificates
Exploiting a flaw in the Nikon Z6 III camera’s multiple exposure
feature, Example 3 (Figure 4) is a forgery that demonstrates that
an adversary can violate all C2PA security goals SG1–SG5. The
flaw, discovered by Adam Horshack [31], enables an adversary to
produce an arbitrary image with a corresponding valid Cr carrying
the camera’s signature. Following Horshack’s disclosure, Nikon re-
voked its signing certificate on September 24, 2025. Despite Nikon’s
revocation, three out of four validators in our experiment continue
to validate Horshack’s forgery six months later on March 25, 2026.
Accepting a revoked signing certificate enables an adversary to
modify the claims and file contents without detection. This exam-
ple also produces inconsistent validator results.
Asset: Manifest:urn:uuid:a3bc6fcf...
1 Assertion:stds.schema-org.CreativeWork
Type: "Person"
Author: "Horshack"
2 Assertion:c2pa.actions
Action: "c2pa.created"
Name: "Horshack"
3 Assertion:c2pa.thumbnail...
4 Assertion:c2pa.hash.boxes
5 Signature:
Issuer: "NIKON CORPORATION"
Time: null
Figure 4: A forged generative AI image originating from a
compromised Nikon Z6 III camera. The image’s Cr carries
a valid signature backed by a revoked certificate, which our
tested validators fail to detect. Accepting a revoked certificate
allows an adversary to violate all security goals S1–S5. This Cr
includes an identity assertion stds.schema-org.CreativeWork,
which attributes the forgery to its creator Adam Horshack.
Horshack created this forgery by exploiting a flaw in Nikon
Z6 III’s multiple exposure feature, which enables an adver-
sary to superimpose an arbitrary, malicious image as an over-
lay for a legitimate image. Subsequently, the camera applies
a valid Cr to this malicious composition.
Example 3’s Cr includes appropriate assertions, including an
identity assertion attributing the forgery to its creator (Adam Hor-
shack), a c2pa.actions assertion indicating Horshack’s camera cre-
ated the image, a c2pa.hash.boxes hard-binding, and a valid signa-
ture from Nikon. The claim signature does not include a trusted
timestamp. By accepting the revoked Nikon certificate, validators
verify the signature.
The CAI, Adobe, and ProofMode validators state the Cr for Hor-
shack’s forgery is valid. Verifieddit indicates that the Cr is invalid,
likely because Verifieddit does not reference entries on the ITL.
Because the specifications do not strictly require a full check for
revocation, none of the validators indicate that Nikon’s C2PA certifi-
cate has been revoked. Accepting a revoked certificate constitutes
a serious security vulnerability.
On January 1, 2026, C2PA discontinued the ITL, noting “No new
entries will be added, and no updates will be made.” [32]. Despite
this pronouncement, CAI issued three subsequent updates, most
recently in March 2026 [33]. Although the latest revision appears

Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
to remove the Nikon certificate, validators—including Adobe’s con-
forming validator—continue to accept it. Unannounced changes
to a supposedly frozen trust list ensures that different validations
will produce different results based on when they cached the list,
violating SG4.
4
C2PA Specifications
The C2PA specifications (Version 2.2) defines a framework in which
content generators create digital assets (e.g., images), Crs that incor-
porate cryptographic hashes, and digital signatures to bind prove-
nance data to digital assets. C2PA’s approach assumes that a user
will use validators to leverage a digital asset’s Cr, in combination
with traditional approaches such as fact-checking, to verify the
asset’s provenance. The specification focuses on cryptographic se-
curity goals (integrity, authentication, non-repudiation) of Crs and
defers the choice of provenance data within a Cr to the content
generator’s C2PA implementation.
Ecosystem. The specification defines a complex ecosystem that
includes users, content generators, and validators (Figure 1). These
entities produce validation flows, Crs, claims, assertions, and claim
signatures, and optionally depend on a trusted timestamp authority
(TSA), the conformance program, and a certificate authority (CA).
Content generators create digital assets and populate the Crs related
to the media. The generators include physical cameras, software
packages, and generative AI systems. The signing certificates may
be provided by device manufacturers, news organizations, journal-
ists, and other entities that output digital media. Validators help
users by verifying Crs of digital assets.
Asset generation and validation flows. As shown in Figure 5,
content generators create digital assets. The application program-
ming interface (API) populates the Cr and attaches it to the asset.
Given an asset and a Cr, a validator verifies the Cr’s cryptographic
signatures.
Users validate each assertion to determine whether an adver-
sary tampered with the assertion, and that the assertion complies
with C2PA’s rules. Rogue content generators may create assertions
that comply with the specification, validate correctly, but present
dishonest, misleading, incomplete, or unhelpful information. For
such assertions, the user might make a value judgment based on the
available information (e.g., othe

[…middle truncated for length…]

seek to evaluate digital object au-
thenticity and distinguish altered from genuine content. While
provenance systems cannot fully guarantee authenticity, they pro-
vide essential assurances regarding creation time, location, device,
attribution, and edit history. Foundational elements of these sys-
tems include cryptography (e.g., encryption, signature, hashing,
PKI infrastructure), trusted hardware (e.g., TPMs), time and location
services (e.g., TSA, GPS), validator tools, conformance programs,
and reputation systems of creators and distributors. However, these
systems face inherent tensions, such as between provenance and
privacy (Appendix H). Importantly, while cryptography detects
tampering, it cannot prove payload truthfulness.
All provenance systems are fundamentally limited by their in-
ability to control capture device inputs. Adversaries may take a
photo of a photo, photograph staged events, or frame misleadingly
incomplete scenes. C2PA understandably ignores this challenge.
Even known capture metadata cannot resolve recapture issues, and
while detection tools exist, advanced AI and editing tools can fur-
ther convolute any interpretation. This was recently illustrated by
controversial images of Venezuelan leader Nicolás Maduro [40].
Optical illusions add further complexity.
Another difficult issue arises from capture devices using AI-
enabled cameras. For example, Google Pixel 10 family and Apple
iPhone cameras default to applying AI-powered software that pro-
cesses information captured through the camera lens. This practice
leaves trace signatures identifying AI alterations on source photos,
making it difficult to separate reality from fiction in the outputs of
capture devices [41, 42].
Provenance systems must clearly articulate what they do and do
not provide, and they must deliver sufficient levels of assurance. It
is counterproductive, dangerous, and harmful for such systems to
provide misleading signals, which might encourage a user to reach
false conclusions (e.g., believing that a fake image is genuine, or
disbelieving a genuine image [43]). Also, it creates confusion when
validators yield contradictory results.
A user’s ability to discern provenance is limited in part by their
knowledge, skills, training, and the resources they might use. Valida-
tors must be highly usable, reliably convey meaningful information,
and be well-maintained.
Provenance systems depend on trustworthy services that provide
timestamps, GPS information, cryptographic certificates, and lists of

Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
trustworthy products. Currently, there are serious limitations with
these services. For example, civilian GPS signals can be spoofed [44],
and the C2PA conformance program does not examine source code
or implementations.
Dealing with aging digital assets is a separate challenge: spec-
ifications might become obsolete; certificates might expire; and
cryptographic primitives might be broken. Provenance systems
must deal with these challenges.
11
Previous and Related Work
To our knowledge, our study is the first comprehensive security
analysis of C2PA, the first formal-methods analysis of C2PA proto-
cols, and the first to evaluate Crs of real photos to determine the
system’s benefits and limitations.
The U.S. Department of Defense [18] assessed content creden-
tials, including C2PA in the context of AI-generated misinforma-
tion. Bushey et al. [45] placed C2PA provenance features within
the broader domain of computational archival science. Earnshaw
et al. [46] analyzed C2PA from a broadcast industry perspective.
Krawetz [47, 48] demonstrated many limitations of C2PA, includ-
ing how users can misinterpret the implications of tamper evi-
dent. Fisher [49] analyzed the flow and removal of C2PA metadata
through distribution channels, and the World Privacy Forum evalu-
ated the privacy implications [50]. Jess Weatherbed [51] discussed
multiple limitations in a non-technical review of C2PA.
Petrangeli et al. [52] introduced a client-side implementation of
C2PA validation for video streaming. Photos et al. [53] extended
the C2PA framework with new privacy features, and Monica et
al. [54] addressed privacy concerns related to C2PA-enabled photo
edits using zero-knowledge proofs. Park et al. [55] presented the
Chimera attack strategy that aims to fool deepfake detectors and
image recapture detectors.
Other approaches for addressing media provenance include:
(1) labeling media in the metadata, such as IPTC’s Digital Source
Type [56] and the XMP standard [57] for tracking provenance and
edits, (2) visible and invisible watermarking, which permits iden-
tifying if the media are AI generated or altered, such as Google
SynthID [58], Adobe TrustMark [59], or Meta Stable Signature [60],
among others, (3) cryptographic notary approaches that assess
whether the file existed and has not been altered, such as SEAL [61]
and various distributed ledger approaches [62, 63]., and (4) personal
attestations, such as those defined by Creator Assertions Working
Group (CAWG) [64] and W3C Verifiable Credentials (VCs) [65]. Many
of these technologies can be combined for layered provenance and
authentication, for example, combining invisible content water-
marking with IPTC’s label, XMP’s history, and SEAL’s notarization.
12
Open Problems and Future Work
Amid rising misinformation, digital forgery, and shifting C2PA
specifications, many open problems remain in assisting users with
digital asset assessment.
(1) Enhance the usability of validators by helping users under-
stand claim assertions and their implications. Enhance the utility
of validators by helping users (to the extent possible) measure
the veracity of claim assertions. To this end, it would be useful
to integrate C2PA with services for reputation, fact-checking, and
directing users to the original sources of digital assets.
(2) Design, build, and test more effective C2PA validators that
fully comply with the specifications and better support users in
assessing provenance.
(3) Analyze additional aspects of C2PA, including security of
Version 2.3 soft-bindings (e.g., watermarking), privacy leaks result-
ing from ingredients and assertions (or redacted assertions), and
applications to non-photographic digital media (e.g., video, audio).
Perform security reviews of conforming C2PA products, including
the EZDRM (DRM as a service), which incorporates C2PA for live
video feeds at Assurance-Level 2.
(4) Explore other cryptographic strategies to combat digital mis-
information (e.g., digital notary services such as SEAL) and compare
these to C2PA.
(5) Investigate how AI can support provenance and authenticity
systems notwithstanding that AI sometimes lies and hallucinates.
As future work, we plan to leverage our experience analyzing
C2PA to design and build a more capable validator.
13
Findings and Recommendations
We summarize our seven main findings concerning the C2PA spec-
ification Version 2.2, validators, and conformance program. These
findings deal with missing critical information, inappropriately
liberal policies, and inadequate treatments of timestamps and cer-
tificate revocation. Weaknesses underlying these findings create
confusion for validators, result in inconsistent validations, and ob-
struct verifying provenance of digital assets. We identify violated
security goals and provide recommendations.
13.1
Findings
(1) Timestamps. Our formal-methods analysis reveals that a
claim signature does not bind to its trusted timestamp. Con-
sequently, an adversary can remove or substitute the times-
tamp without detection. Additionally, the specifications
permit validators, such as CAI’s open-source C2PA valida-
tion framework, to validate assets with malformed times-
tamps, providing only an informational warning and not
an error. According to the specifications, these intentional
design decisions enable generators to create C2PA claims
and timestamp them later (e.g., when taking a photo in an
area with no network access to a TSA). This finding violates
SG3.
We reported this issue to C2PA via email on October 27, 2025
and discussed the issue in subsequent meetings with them.
This weakness persists in Version 2.3 of the specifications.
(2) Version number. C2PA manifests do not include a field indi-
cating their version. Consequently, validators cannot work
correctly, and they process outdated manifests inconsistently—
sometimes dangerously (Figure 3). This finding violates
SG4.
We reported this issue to C2PA on September 30, 2025. C2PA 2.3
includes a version field but does not require generators to use
it and does not report an error if the version field does not
match the Cr feature set.

Golaszewski et al.
(3) Certificate revocation. Although C2PA 2.2 suggests check-
ing for revoked certificates, CAI’s open-source validator
software [20, 66] does not check for revocations by default.
Validators that rely on this package will accept revoked
or expired certificates. For example, after a publicized at-
tack on Nikon’s C2PA, Nikon revoked their certificate on
September 24, 2025 [38]. Nevertheless, public validators (in-
cluding conforming validators) continued to deem Nikon-
signed claims valid through January 14, 2026 and beyond.
Similarly, C2PA 2.3 suggests that validators ascertain and
reject revoked certificates. This version, however, supports
only OCSP [39, 67] (which undermines privacy) and does
not support revocation lists. This finding directly violates
SG4 and indirectly all security goals SG1–SG5 as a result
of accepting revoked certificates.
We reported this issue to C2PA on September 30, 2025.
(4) Metadata. Motivated in part by protecting privacy, gen-
erators are required only to include a creation assertion
identifying what generator created or modified the digital
asset, and a hard-binding to the asset’s binary data. Many
implementations include only these required assertions and
do not protect useful metadata (e.g., time, location, EXIF,
XMP, and IPTC metadata fields), which can assist users and
experts in assessing provenance. For example, the Pixel 10
omits camera information from the manifest, and the ini-
tial release omitted EXIF data from the cryptographic pro-
tection. This finding complicates a user’s ability to assess
provenance of a digital asset.
We reported this issue to Google and C2PA on October 28,
2025. Version 2.3 of the C2PA specifications did not update the
required assertions. In December 2025, Google updated the
Pixel 10 [68] to include large portions of the EXIF metadata
in their hard-bindings, thereby incorporating the data into
the manifest.
(5) File integrity. The manifest permits excluding specific byte
ranges of the media from cryptographic protection and al-
lows for the redaction of signed assertions. Any data not
protected by hashing can be exploited by an adversary to al-
ter information or remove attribution without invalidating
the signature.
We reported this issue to C2PA on March 24, 2026.
(6) Manifest labels. The C2PA specifications permit nested man-
ifests with unique labels, and recommend omitting the man-
ifest from the cryptographic signature [5, Section 10.4.1].
This combination creates a blind-spot, where the labels
can be altered without detection. By manipulating the label
names so that they are not unique, we produced images that
crashed validators based on CAI’s open source c2patool.
Other validators (e.g., CAI, Adobe) returned errors when
processing these manifests. This finding violates SG4 and
SG5.
We reported this issue on October 28, 2025, and a bug was sub-
mitted on November 7, 2025 [69]. CAI fixed the segmentation
fault in the source code, but C2PA 2.3 did not modify their
guidance to validators concerning conflicting label processing.
(7) Privacy. The C2PA specifications permit redacting content
for privacy without violating the signature. However, any
data that can be redacted can also be altered to mislead the
user.
We discussed this issue with C2PA representatives on August
11, 2025.
13.2
Recommendations
Based on our evaluation of the C2PA 2.2 specifications, we make
the following recommendations:
(1) Timestamps. Require the signer to incorporate the times-
tamp as an assertion within the claim. For the case of gener-
ating a claim signature offline (without access to a TSA), re-
quire claim generators to generate update manifests, which
include a timestamp assertion, when online. Require veri-
fiers to report malformed timestamps as errors.
(2) Version number. Require generators and validators to use
the version field. Manifest entries that do not comply with
the stated version in the conforming products list must be
marked as an error.
(3) Certificate revocation. Require validators to determine the
revocation status of all certificates (e.g., using CRLs) and
reject all revoked certificates. Support CRLs. Require val-
idators to identify to users which trust list(s) they are using.
Specify security requirements for conforming validators.
(4) Metadata. Encourage generators to include additional ver-
ified assertions, including time, location, EXIF, XMP, and
IPTC metadata fields.
(5) File integrity. Following the principle of least privilege, the
exclusion range must be restricted to the absolute func-
tional minimum. Excluding data outside of the manifest,
or in unprotected manifest portions, enables undetectable
alterations and impact provenance.
(6) Manifest labels. As with file integrity, the signature should
cover the entire manifest, only excluding the signature.
(7) Privacy. Changes to the media for anonymity must require
resigning with a notation of the edit.
14
Conclusion
Our study uncovers seven serious problems with the C2PA specifi-
cations, validator implementations, and conformance program. For
example, our formal-methods analysis shows that C2PA claim gen-
erators and validators fail to agree on the claim signature’s trusted
timestamp. Furthermore, the specifications’ inadequate certificate
revocation policies allow validators to accept manifests signed by
compromised certificates, which allows a DY adversary to violate
all five security goals. Due in part to insufficient information in
claims (e.g., version), ambiguity in identifying which manifest is
active, and inappropriately permissive policies, conforming valida-
tor implementations sometimes produce contradictory conclusions.
The C2PA conformance program certifies products without defin-
ing security requirements for conforming validators and without
reviewing source code.
There has been a history of overstating what C2PA is capable
of achieving (Appendix I). At best, and only assuming that valid
certificates are used, the C2PA specifications achieve SG1 (tamper
evidence of claims) and SG2 (weak file integrity). Even with this
strong assumption, SG1 and SG2 are only narrowly true: parts of

Verifying Provenance of Digital Media:
Security Analysis of C2PA and its Implementation
the digital asset file unprotected by digital signature (the exclusion
range) can be modified without detection (Section 2). Furthermore,
that promise is insufficient to address the need to assess the prove-
nance of digital assets: it is also important to assure timestamp
agreement and validator consistency (Section 5). Furthermore, an
untampered false, ambiguous, or meaningless claim is useless, and
potentially harmful, when backed up by a C2PA verified signature.
While there are fundamental limits to what a system like C2PA
can possibly achieve to assist users in evaluating provenance, more
can and should be done. There is tension between privacy and
provenance, but concern for privacy is no excuse for several of the
engineering mistakes (e.g., disallowing privacy-preserving methods
for checking for revoked certificates (Section 4)). We recommend
several ways to strengthen the specifications, some of which have
been implemented in the Pixel 10 (December 2025 update [68]) and
C2PA 2.3 [39]. We hope our remaining recommendations will be
adopted by later specification versions and future verifiers.
On March 5, 2026, during a panel presentation about C2PA to
congressional staff, lobbyists, and policymakers, Adobe’s Andy
Parsons (Global Head of Content Authenticity) overstated, “. . . Now
this is ready. This technology works. It’s been battle tested. It’s on
some phones. It’s in cameras. Um, make sure anybody you meet . . . in
your travels through Congress is aware that this technology is ready.
It works. It’s proven. And now we need to put it to work.” [35, at time
1:09:05 in video].
Unfortunately, as we have shown, neither the long complex C2PA
specifications, C2PA validators, nor C2PA conformance program
yet provide the guarantees required for reliable deployment or
standards adoption. For example, the specifications inadequately
deal with timestamps, certificate revocation, and version numbers.
There are insufficient guidelines for validators and conforming val-
idators produce inconsistent results. The conformance program
does not check validator functionality, examine source code, or
specify validator security requirements. Although the underlying
cryptography in C2PA is battle tested, its integration in the specifi-
cations is not and has failed our tests. There is a danger that, in the
presence of misinformation, an unreliable tool prematurely rushed
for adoption could increase confusion rather than provide clarity.
Marketing and commercial aspirations should not taint scientific
judgment. More careful cryptographic design, engineering, and
analysis is needed.
The C2PA ecosystem rests on the specifications. As we demon-
strate, serious vulnerabilities in the specifications exist that un-
dermine the ecosystem. C2PA could eventually be positioned to
become a widely adopted useful tool for helping people to assess
the provenance of digital assets. We hope that our study and rec-
ommendations will accelerate this process and strengthen C2PA.