And TLS lived happily ever after
Michael Scott, Gora Adj and Francisco Rodr´ıguez-Henr´ıquez
Cryptography Research Centre
Technology Innovation Institute
{michael.scott,gora.adj,francisco.rodriguez}@tii.ae
Abstract
The plausible threat of a Cryptographically Relevant Quantum
Computer (CRQC) has rightly stimulated a move away from tradi-
tional methods of asymmetric cryptography to new post-quantum se-
cure equivalents. Digital signature is the cryptographic primitive that
authenticates an Internet server’s identity by signing each certificate in
an X.509 certificate chain. A suggested response to the CRQC threat is
to deploy a hybrid classical/post-quantum digital signature, combining
a traditional tried-and-tested scheme with a post-quantum alternative,
where certificates are signed using both methods. Here we propose a
fused signature scheme that adopts the same approach, but introduces
minimal friction into existing TLS architectures.
1
Introduction
A Cryptographically Relevant Quantum Computer (CRQC) represents a
plausible threat to classic methods of asymmetric cryptography. That is
plausible, not imminent, not even inevitable. Nevertheless, it is a threat
which deserves a response. The cryptographic community has responded
quickly with new methods for key exchange and digital signature which
are immune to a CRQC, and have already advanced to a stage where such
methods are standardised.
TLS is the most important cryptographic protocol in use today. It is
activated everytime a website is accessed. It protects and hence makes pos-
sible e-commerce on the Internet. You will have activated it in the process of
viewing this preprint. Ideally our response to the threat of a CRQC would
merely require the replacement of older primitives with newer and improved
alternatives, something which indeed has happened in the past as TLS has
evolved. However, there are 3 additional problems that can arise in a move
to a post-quantum world. (1) The new primitives will have different com-
putational requirements. (2) The new primitives will impact the bandwidth
requirements of the protocol, that is the amount of data that needs to be
exchanged between server and client during a protocol handshake. (3) The
1

new primitives will not have yet survived the all-important “test of time”,
that is their true security in the face of a CRQC, or indeed classical methods
of cryptanalysis, is still uncertain.
In the interests of making a TLS implementation as “agile” as possible,
adapting to a post-quantum world should simply require the replacement of
certain cryptographic primitives, without further deeper structural changes.
This would be desirable, but is it possible?
2
Preliminaries
2.1
TLS
TLS version 1.3 is a three-pass protocol that uses a Key Exchange Mecha-
nism (KEM) to establish a mutual secret key, from which are derived keys
to encrypt the client-server communication. Until now the X25519 Diffie-
Hellman key exchange has been popular, and requires the exchange of only
32 bytes of data. However, already the threat of harvest-now-decrypt-later
attacks has motivated a move to a hybrid method. Post-quantum KEMs
have been proposed and standardised, the most popular being the lattice-
based scheme known as ML-KEM, and the X25519MLKEM768 hybrid is
already on its way to becoming a de-facto standard in TLS.
Let us briefly recap how the TLS protocol works in its most common
configuration.
We consider only the most recent version of TLS, that is
version 1.3 [38].
A client sends a bunch of stuff to the server, including an ephemeral KEM
public share. The server sends a bunch of stuff back, including its ephemeral
KEM public share. This exchange of public shares is used to derive a mutual
(but unauthenticated) secret key. The client sends some final stuff before
dropping down to an encrypted and one-way authenticated communication
between client and server. As early as possible the protocol data flow is
encrypted using the secret key, which is possible partway through the server’s
response (or even earlier if Encrypted Client Hello [39] is enabled).
Typically the client-to-server protocol messages tend to be small. How-
ever the server-to-client communication can be quite large, as it may include
a PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) certificate chain. This certificate chain
performs a vital function – it authenticates the server to the client by se-
curely providing a public key to the client, which allows it to verify the
server’s signature on the protocol transcript.
It is important to note here that once the server has authenticated itself,
it may send the client a resumption ticket, to be stored typically as a browser
cookie. This allows the client to resume at a later time (maybe as long as
a week later) without the requirement for the certificate chain to be sent
again. This greatly reduces the amount of communication required in the
handshake (the KEM share values typically remain, but resumption removes
2

digital signature/verification completely from the handshake). However we
will consider here only the case where a certificate chain will be transmitted.
2.2
PKI
All X.509 digital certificates contain details of the entity that owns it and an
associated Public Key. Appended is the digital signature of another entity
which attests to the certificate’s validity. Each certificate entity owns and
protects the private key associated with that embedded Public Key.
A TLS certificate chain typically consists of three digital certificates.
At the root lies a self-signed Certificate Authority (CA) certificate. The
recognised certificate authorities in the world number in the low hundreds.
Next is an intermediate authority certificate, signed by the root owner’s pri-
vate key. Finally comes the leaf (or server) certificate, which represents the
“business end” of the chain. Its owning entity is typically the identity/URL
of the website being visited by the client. The leaf certificate is signed by
the intermediate’s private key. The public key of the leaf certificate and its
associated private key are used as described above by the TLS protocol.
Root certificates, since there are a finite number of them, are commonly
stored by the client, and hence do not need to be transmitted during the
protocol handshake.
Each certificate has a lifetime. Typically a root certificate might have a
lifetime of 5 years, an intermediate certificate of 2 years, and a leaf certificate
of 1 year. However there are moves afoot to reduce leaf certificate lifetimes
down to as low as 47 days, or even shorter. This has benefits, as it means that
(a) the leaf certificate may be justified in supporting a lower security level
as an attacker would need to break it within its lifetime, and (b) certificate
revocation, a major bugbear of PKI, becomes less of an issue.
2.3
Post-Quantum signatures
Post-quantum signature schemes have already been proposed and standard-
ised after intense scrutiny by the cryptographic community. The effort is
ongoing and new schemes can expect to be recommended in the near future.
In time they may expect to completely replace the classical RSA and ECC
methods. See Table 1
A problem is already evident. Each certificate contains a public key and
a digital signature. Using the currently standardised PQ algorithms this
means that the certificate chain will increase dramatically in size and the
bandwidth requirement of the protocol may start to become an issue. But
note our inclusion of the not-currently-standardised isogeny-based scheme
SQIsign. Using isogenies we have the potential for much smaller public
keys and signatures.
3

Table 1: Public-key/signature sizes in bytes
Algorithm
Level 1
Level 3
Level 5
NIST-ECCa[28, 30, 29, 43]
65/64
97/96
133/132
RSAb[28, 29, 25]
384/384
960/960
1920/1920
ML-DSA [33] (PQ)
1312/2420
1952/3309
2592/4627
FN-DSA [31] (PQ)
897/666
–
1793/1280
SLH-DSA [32] (PQ)
32/7856
48/16224
64/29792
SQIsign (PQ)
65/148
97/224
129/292
a Uncompressed EC public keys and fixed-width raw ECDSA signatures.
b RSA row reports modulus bytes / signature bytes.
A fully encoded RSA
public key in X.509/SPKI is slightly larger.
We shall refer to each byte of cryptographic material as a crypto-
byte.
Assume a PQ implementation of TLS version 1.3 which uses
X25519MLKEM768 for key exchange. This requires the server to send a
1120 cryptobyte public share to the client.
Consider a certificate chain that used ML-DSA at security level 1 for
the leaf certificate, and ML-DSA level 3 for the intermediate and root cer-
tificates. The leaf certificate would contain 1312+3309 cryptobytes. The
intermediate certificate would require 1952+3309 cryptobytes.
The TLS
server transcript signature would require 2420 cryptobytes. Adding in the
KEM key share that is a total of 13422 cryptobytes to be transmitted from
server to client.
And that is before we even consider X.509 and other protocol overheads.
Some experimental evidence suggests that a transmission of anything over
10000 bytes would start causing performance problems for TLS [44], [45].
A solution being pushed by Google is to use so-called Merkle Tree Certifi-
cates. See [21] for an unbiased review of the advantages and disadvantages
of this approach. However some concern has been expressed that Merkle
Tree Certificates as proposed may represent an undesirable concentration of
control over the Internet in the hands of browser vendors. And is it strictly
necessary?
Consider next a chain that used ML-DSA at security level 1 for the leaf
certificate, and SQIsign level 3 for the intermediate and root certificates.
The leaf certificate would contain 1312+224 cryptobytes. The intermediate
certificate would require 97+224 cryptobytes. The TLS server transcript
signature would again require 2420 cryptobytes. Adding in the KEM key
share yields a total of 5397 cryptobytes to be transmitted from server to
client.
The above analysis excludes the cost of signatures associated with the
optional Certificate Transparency mechanism, which would add two more
signatures per handshake [44]. This would further significantly impact the
4

bandwidth requirement for the ML-DSA based solution, but would have
much less effect on a SQIsign-based solution.
3
Isogeny-based cryptography
The idea of using isogenies on elliptic curves as a basis for post-quantum
cryptography has been around for a long time. But unfortunately it got off
to a very bad start. The key exchange algorithm based on isogenies known
as SIDH [22] had a surprisingly long history before it was comprehensively
broken [10]. Sadly by the time it was broken considerable investments in
time and effort had been expended in order to make it practical, which made
its fall particularly devastating.
However the isogeny community has picked itself up, and is again quite
bullish about the prospects for isogeny-based cryptography [14], [4].
We
suspect that it is only a matter of time before a scheme is developed which
is competitive with those already standardised. But even now the proposal
SQIsign [14] is on the verge of practicality.
One negative characteristic of SQIsign is that signature generation is
slow, and hard to make constant time. However, in the scenario considered
above SQIsign signing is never required during the execution of TLS, by
either client or server.
It is only required for the offline construction of
the certificate chain.
On the other hand SQIsign verification, which is
required by the client, is relatively fast (compared with signing) and is easy
to implement in constant time.
Many currently proposed schemes like SQIsign use finite field arithmetic
based on the primes 5.2248−1, 65.2376−1 and 27.2500−1. Fields of these sizes
would be familiar to implementors of standard elliptic curve cryptography,
and schemes based on such primes would be expected to hit levels 1,3, and
5 of security in both classic and isogeny-based contexts. These primes p are
chosen such that p + 1 is divisible by a large power of 2, which is important
for isogeny-based proposals. However such primes are also Montgomery-
friendly [3], and in the past primes of this form were suggested for use in
standard classical Elliptic-Curve Cryptography [9].
3.1
SQIsign
The Short Quaternion and Isogeny Signature scheme (SQIsign) currently
stands as the leading isogeny-based signature proposal and remains as the
only isogeny-based candidate in NIST’s call for additional post-quantum
signature schemes. NIST launched Round 1 in June 2023 and accepted 40
proposals spanning a broad range of hard problems [34]; in October 2024,
it advanced 14 of these schemes to the second round.
Among all round
2 candidates, SQIsign distinguishes itself by offering by far the smallest
combined signature and public-key size. Its principal drawback, however,
5

10−1
100
101
102
103
103
104
105
106
Verification cost (million cycles)
2 · pk + 5 · sig (bytes)
Other candidates
CROSS
MQOM
QR-UOV
SQIsign
MAYO
UOV
ML-DSA
FN-DSA / Falcon
SPHINCS+
Figure 1: Performance/size trade-off for selected post-quantum signature
schemes in a TLS setting. The x-axis reports verification cost (million cy-
cles), and the y-axis reports the metric 2 · pk + 5 · sig in bytes. SQIsign
is shown together with selected comparison families; other candidates are
shown in the background (figure adapted from [2]).
is performance: signing remains substantially slower than in lattice-based
schemes, verification achieves a decent but moderate efficiency, and current
implementations do not operate in constant time [11, 1]. These features
make SQIsign especially attractive in applications that prioritize compact
signatures and predominantly perform verification, such as certificate infras-
tructures, software authentication, and resource-constrained devices. Using
the PQ-SORT tool [2] we can see in Figure 1 that SQIsign is especially
well suited for TLS applications compared to the other NIST additional sig-
nature candidates and also to the standardised signature options such as
ML-DSA [33], FN-DSA [31] and SLH-DSA [32].
Originally introduced at Asiacrypt 2020 [5], SQIsign has developed
rapidly.
The first improvements preserved the original framework [15],
whereas subsequent work introduced more substantial algorithmic changes.
Ironically, a major turning point followed the devastating attacks on
SIDH/SIKE [10, 24, 40], which brought higher-dimensional abelian varieties
to the forefront of isogeny-based cryptography.
Their key tool is Kani’s
lemma [23], which combines isogenies of degrees a and b into an isogeny of
degree a+b between abelian varieties of dimension two or higher. Although
this approach increases the dimension of the original isogenies, it can be
implemented efficiently by setting a + b = 2n, with n fixed.
6

This constructive usage of Kani’s lemma was first exploited in
SQIsignHD [12], which replaced parts of the original protocol with higher-
dimensional constructions and reported roughly 40× faster signing together
with similarly faster key generation.
These gains, however, came at the
cost of expensive 4- or 8-dimensional verification. More recently, the algo-
rithmic advances of [26, 37] enabled two-dimensional variants of SQIsign,
developed independently in [27, 5, 16]. These schemes use 2D isogenies for
both signing and verification, achieving substantial improvements over the
original 1D version. Their security analyses also provide a more rigorous
foundation and largely remove the heuristic assumptions that appear in the
1D SQIsign presented in [11].
Table 2 highlights the remarkable performance gains of 2D SQIsign [1]
over its 1D counterpart [11]. For the former, signature generation and veri-
fication now require only 101.6 million and 5.1 million Ice Lake clock cycles,
respectively. More recently, the authors of [17] presented a vectorized im-
plementation of SQIsign for several high-performance Arm microarchitec-
tures. Their implementation achieves speedups of 2.24× in key generation
and 2.49× in signing relative to the reference implementation of [1]. When
combined with the Qlapoti procedure [8] (see [17, Table 6]), SQIsign key
generation and signing require only 28.98 million and 73.04 million Cortex-
A76 clock cycles, respectively.
Table 2: SQIsign assembly-optimised implementation
performance in millions of clock cycles
Security level
KeyGen
Sign
Verify
Round 1∗
NIST-Level 1
1,661.0
2,370.0
37.0
Round 2∗∗
NIST-Level 1
43.3
101.6
5.1
NIST-Level 3
134.0
309.2
18.6
NIST-Level 5
212.0
507.5
35.7
∗Intel Xeon Gold 6338 (Ice Lake).
∗∗Intel Core i7-13700K CPU (Raptor Lake).
We also gain greater flexibility in prime selection in the 2D SQIsign
setting, since we can use primes of the form p = c · 2f −1, where c is a
small odd integer. Such primes provide abundant two-torsion and enable
faster arithmetic, which in turn can further accelerate verification. We also
note that recent optimised implementations show that fast 2D verification
is competitive in practice, with timings as low as 5.1 million Raptor Lake
clock cycles. Moreover, we find that the 2D signing procedure is naturally
more amenable to parallelisation [17]. The main computational bottleneck
in these 2D schemes, however, remains the evaluation of a 2D isogeny of de-
7

gree approximately (2λ, 2λ), where λ denotes the security parameter; see [5,
Algorithm 8].
3.2
The SQIsign identification scheme
The original SQIsign protocol [11] combines elliptic curves, quaternion al-
gebras, and the Deuring correspondence to build an identification scheme
with exponential challenge space, which the Fiat–Shamir transform [18] then
turns into a signature scheme with extremely compact signatures and public
keys. At its core lies a Σ-protocol that proves knowledge of the endomor-
phism ring of the public-key curve. Since verification is the relevant SQIsign
primitive for this work, we give an informal overview of the protocol, accord-
ing to its Round 2 NIST specification [1].
Referring to Figure 2, let E0 be a fixed starting elliptic curve with public
endomorphism ring O0 = End(E0). Alice’s secret key consists of a randomly
chosen ideal Iφ, which the Deuring correspondence translates into an isogeny
φ : E0 →EA, where the codomain EA serves as her public key. The function
IdealToIsogeny, which plays a central role in key generation, computes this
isogeny efficiently.
In the Σ-protocol shown in Figure 2, Alice proves knowledge of End(EA)
as follows. She first generates a random commitment curve E1 using the
same approach as in key generation. Bob, acting as the verifier, then samples
a random cyclic 2-isogeny φchall : E1 →E2 and sends a description of φchall
to Alice. Since only Alice knows End(E1), only she can efficiently compute
End(E2). At that point, she has the crucial ingredients, namely, End(EA)
and End(E2), needed to compute a cyclic isogeny φresp : EA →E2.
In the round-two version of SQIsign [1], the central routine Ideal-
ToIsogeny relies on Kani’s lemma and 2-dimensional abelian varieties, closely
following the approach of [5].
More recent work has further accelerated
this step through the Qlapoti procedure [8], which also uses 2-dimensional
abelian varieties.
The response sent to the verifier is represented as a 2-dimensional isogeny
that embeds the 1-dimensional isogeny from the public key to the commit-
ment.
Concretely, the response consists of a single 2D isogeny of length
approximately 2
λ
2 together with a challenge isogeny of length 22λ. One can
compute the 2D isogeny using optimal strategies together with the so-called
gluing and splitting isogenies [13].
This structure makes SQIsign implementations inherently asymmetric.
Key generation and signing depend both on Fp-arithmetic for isogeny com-
putations and on multi-precision integer arithmetic for quaternion algebra
operations, whereas verification uses no quaternion arithmetic at all. Con-
sequently, verification has substantially smaller code coverage.
8

E0
E1
EA
E2
φsecret
φcom
φchall
φresp
Figure 2: Diagram of the SQIsign protocol.
4
A new elliptic curve
Using standard point-counting software, we find the twist-secure Edwards
curve Ed376 defined over the isogeny-friendly field associated with the prime
modulus p = 65.2376 −1
x2 + y2 = 1 −66524x2y2
There is a generator point corresponding to x = 2, which generates the
group of prime order q
q = 104000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000303A69B3514879CD109A98F 29F 0D04F 09F 855D4F 3C6A703716
where the number of points on the curve is 4q. Since p = 3 mod 4 the
number of points on the twisted curve is also four times a prime.
An Edwards signature based on this curve requires 48 bytes for the public
key and 96 bytes for a signature. The implementation basically follows that
of the EdDSA method based on the Ed448 curve as specified in the NIST
standard document [35]. Observe that since the prime p is less than 384
bits in length, the top bit can be used to encode the sign of the compressed
public key, without requiring an additional byte.
If required, there is also the associated twist-secure Montgomery curve
y2 = x3 + 266098.x2 + x
5
Hybrid Signatures
Just as with KEMs it makes a lot of sense in the near-term to use hybrid
signatures. That is to sign everything twice, once with a tried and tested
classical scheme, and again with a CRQC-immune post-quantum scheme.
Both signatures would need to verify for the overall signature to be accepted.
The problem is to decide which methods to pair, and a concern is that given
the number of possible combinations TLS could end up having to support
multiple proposals. Working out the exact security parity between possible
pairings could also be an issue. See [7] for consideration of some possible
9

combinations. In this recent draft, no less than 18 combinations involving
ML-DSA as the post-quantum component are suggested [36].
5.1
Hybrid Signature Requirements in TLS Depend on the
Role
One important aspect to take into account in post-quantum authentication
in TLS is that there are several TLS signature problems. Typically, a first
connection in the Web PKI involves several signatures with different perfor-
mance and deployment constraints. In the case of a unique or single visit
to a website, the client-server interaction may involve not only the certifi-
cate chain and the TLS handshake signature, but also additional so-called
certificate transparency signatures [45].
We note that there exist two scenarios that are especially relevant. First,
some signatures are accompanied by their public keys during the handshake,
whereas others are not. On the other hand, for the signature of the root on
the intermediate certificate, and for signed certificate timestamps (SCTs),
the public key is typically not transmitted during the handshake. In these
cases, signature size is the dominant metric. By contrast, the leaf certificate
and the TLS transcript signature do involve transmitted public-key material,
so for those roles the main design factor to be taken into account is the
combined size of the public key and signature.
Second, some signatures are produced offline while others are produced
online. Certificate signatures are generated ahead of time and then verified
many times by clients. However, the TLS transcript signature must be com-
puted during the handshake protocol and is therefore critical for the overall
latency of the protocol. For that reason, the online handshake signature
requires a better balance between signing and verification time, whereas the
offline certificate signatures can tolerate a slower signing, and even non-
constant time signing, if in exchange they offer compact sizes and efficient
verification.
Hence, in this paper we suggest that it is better to view TLS authen-
tication as a combination of signatures, where different signatures in the
handshake have different constraints on bandwidth, latency and verifica-
tion cost.
Today, the certificate material is a substantial fraction of the
data transferred on non-resumed connections, and a naive blunt migration
to large post-quantum signatures risks producing certificate chains that are
prone to compatibility and performance degradation issues.
5.2
A hybrid authentication design for TLS
Taking into account the observations from the previous subsection, we pro-
pose a hybrid authentication strategy rather than a pure post-quantum re-
placement. Our main idea is to use a fused signature built from SQIsign-3
10

Table 3: Design approaches for post-quantum TLS authentication.
Approach
Advantages
Size
Online
signing
Main concern
All-ML-DSA
Uniform
replacement across
chain and
handshake
High
≈+15 kB
Simple
Certificate and
handshake bloat
FN-DSA split
Offline certificates;
classical/PQ mix
for the handshake
Medium
≈+7 kB
Delicate
Constant-time
floating-point
signing
Merkle Tree Cer-
tificates
Large-scale
WebPKI redesign
Low online
bytes
N/A
Significant
ecosystem and
standards changes
Proposed
fused
SQIsign-
3/Ed376
Compact offline
certification
material
Low–
medium
Avoided
SQIsign
verification cost
and an Edwards signature using the companion curve presented in section 4.
We motivate this choice as follows. The 192-bit security level is appro-
priate for intermediate and root certificates, SQIsign-3 offers remarkably
compact post-quantum public keys and signatures, and the Edwards com-
panion curve provides a classical cryptographic hedge over the same base
field. By working over the same field, we allow both components to share
the underlying field arithmetic. Our resulting fused public key has size
97 + 48 = 145 bytes,
and our fused signature has size
224 + 96 = 320 bytes.
These sizes are small enough to make our approach attractive in the parts
of TLS where authentication bytes are most expensive.
In our prototype implementation, we deliberately do not use SQIsign
for the online TLS transcript signature. Instead, as described below, we
keep a level-1 hybrid ML-DSA/Ed25519 public key in the leaf certificate,
while key exchange uses the de-facto standard X25519MLKEM768 hybrid
KEM.
We present this proposal as a proof-of-concept experiment rather than
as a fully standardised X.509 implementation. In the current prototype, we
represent fused public keys and fused signatures by direct concatenation. A
full standardisation effort is still needed to specify the exact semantics of
the certificate encoding and the remaining formal design aspects.
Table 3 compares our proposal with other potential TLS design solutions.
11

5.3
Security semantics of the fused construction
In this work, we intend the fused approach to achieve a same-message, all-
components-must-verify composition of two signature schemes. We make
this semantics explicit, while deliberately keeping the discussion high-level.
We focus only on the signature-composition semantics of the proposed hy-
brid design, and we do not attempt to model revocation, CA compromise,
side-channel leakage, or the broader standardisation questions related to
X.509 encoding. These issues are clearly important, but they are orthogo-
nal to our central claim: under a conjunctive same-message verification rule,
the proposed fused construction has the expected hybrid-authentication se-
mantics.
The notion of existential unforgeability under chosen-message attack
(EUF-CMA) goes back to the seminal work of Goldwasser, Micali, and
Rivest [20], and later it was formalized by Bellare and Rogaway [6].
Intuitively, EUF-CMA security means that given the public key and ora-
cle access to signatures on adaptively chosen messages, an efficient adversary
still cannot output a valid signature on a fresh message outside its signing
queries.
5.3.1
Security framework
Let
Σ1 = (Kg1, Sign1, Vrfy1)
and
Σ2 = (Kg2, Sign2, Vrfy2)
be two digital signature schemes. In our setting, Σ1 will be a post-quantum
scheme (for example SQIsign or ML-DSA, depending on the TLS role) and
Σ2 will be a classical scheme (for example Ed376 or Ed25519).
Definition 1 (Fused signature scheme). The fused signature scheme
Σ⊗= (Kg⊗, Sign⊗, Vrfy⊗)
is defined as follows.
1. Key generation. Execute,
(pk1, sk1) ←Kg1,
(pk2, sk2) ←Kg2,
and output
pk⊗= (pk1, pk2),
sk⊗= (sk1, sk2).
2. Signing. Let enc(ρ, m) be a canonical encoding of the role tag ρ and
message m. On input (sk⊗, ρ, m), compute
σ1 ←Sign1(sk1, enc(ρ, m)),
σ2 ←Sign2(sk2, enc(ρ, m)),
and output
σ⊗= (σ1, σ2).
12

3. Verification. On input (pk⊗, ρ, m, σ⊗), where σ⊗= (σ1, σ2), accept
if and only if
Vrfy1(pk1, enc(ρ, m), σ1) = 1
and
Vrfy2(pk2, enc(ρ, m), σ2) = 1.
The role tag ρ provides domain separation. In our TLS setting, it dis-
tinguishes at least the following cases:
ρ ∈{root-cert, intermediate-cert, leaf-cert, tls-transcript}.
For certificates, m is the exact TBSCertificate byte string. For the TLS
1.3 handshake, m is the standard TLS transcript input signed by the server.
Thus both components sign exactly the same canonical byte string, under
an explicit role tag.
Proposition 1 (Unforgeability of the fused construction). Suppose Σ1 and
Σ2 are EUF-CMA secure. Then Σ⊗is EUF-CMA secure. More precisely,
for every probabilistic polynomial-time adversary A against Σ⊗, there exist
probabilistic polynomial-time adversaries B1 and B2 such that
Adveuf-cma
Σ⊗
(A) ≤Adveuf-cma
Σ1
(B1)
and
Adveuf-cma
Σ⊗
(A) ≤Adveuf-cma
Σ2
(B2).
Furthermore, a successful forgery against the fused construction yields a
successful forgery against each component scheme on the same fresh encoded
message.
Proof sketch. We describe the reduction to Σ1; the reduction to Σ2 is anal-
ogous.
Adversary B1 receives the public key pk1 and oracle access to
Sign1(sk1, ·). It generates (pk2, sk2) ←Kg2 on its own and gives (pk1, pk2)
to A as the fused public key.
Whenever A requests a fused signature on (ρ, m), B1 queries its signing
oracle on enc(ρ, m) to obtain σ1, computes σ2 ←Sign2(sk2, enc(ρ, m)) itself,
and returns (σ1, σ2).
Suppose A outputs a valid forgery
(ρ⋆, m⋆, (σ⋆
1, σ⋆
2))
for a fresh message such that
(ρ⋆, m⋆) was never submitted to the fused
signing oracle and
Vrfy⊗
 (pk1, pk2), ρ⋆, m⋆, (σ⋆
1, σ⋆
2)

= 1.
Then in particular
Vrfy1(pk1, enc(ρ⋆, m⋆), σ⋆
1) = 1,
and freshness of (ρ⋆, m⋆) implies that σ⋆
1 is a valid EUF-CMA forgery for
Σ1.
13

Proposition 1 captures the basic security intuition behind the fused con-
struction: because verification requires both components to verify on the
same message, an attacker who breaks only one component does not au-
tomatically obtain a forgery against the fused scheme. In this sense, the
fused construction inherits the security of each of its components, provided
verifiers enforce the conjunctive verification rule of Definition 1.
Remark 1 (What happens if one component fails?). Suppose one compo-
nent scheme becomes insecure, while the other remains EUF-CMA secure.
Under the all-components-must-verify rule, the fused construction still can-
not be forged unless the remaining secure component is also forged. Thus
the fused construction provides the usual hybrid “security hedge” sought in
certificate applications.
Role-specific interpretation in our TLS design.
The proposed TLS
instantiation uses different signature mechanisms for different authentication
roles.
• For root and intermediate certificate signatures, we use the fused con-
struction based on SQIsign-3 and Ed376. A certificate is accepted
only if both component signatures verify on the same TBSCertificate
encoding.
• For the leaf certificate and the online TLS transcript signature, we use
a level-1 hybrid ML-DSA/Ed25519 public key and the corresponding
conjunctive verification rule.
• Therefore, every mandatory authentication step in the non resumed
handshake is interpreted under an explicit all-components-must-verify
semantics.
Proposition 2. Consider a non resumed TLS 1.3 handshake in our setting,
and assume:
1. the client performs standard certificate-path validation;
2. each mandatory signature check in the chain and transcript uses the
conjunctive verification rule described above;
3. the relevant private signing keys have not been compromised; and
4. the underlying signature schemes used in each role are EUF-CMA se-
cure.
Then any successful server-impersonation attack on a fresh handshake im-
plies at least one of the following events:
14

1. a successful forgery of a mandatory certificate signature in the accepted
chain; or
2. a successful forgery of the mandatory transcript signature under the
accepted leaf public key.
Proof sketch. Under standard TLS 1.3 authentication semantics, acceptance
of the server identity requires both an accepted certificate chain and a valid
transcript signature under the authenticated leaf key. Therefore an imper-
sonating adversary must either cause the client to accept a certificate chain
that was not legitimately issued, or else produce a valid transcript signature
for the authenticated leaf key without access to the corresponding private
key. These are exactly the two events stated above.
6
A proposal
A fairly obvious idea would be to implement a fused hybrid scheme based
on a level 3 SQIsign implementation combined with an Edwards signa-
ture based on Ed376. Note that this implementation could share highly
optimised finite field arithmetic code for the prime p = 65.2376 −1. The
combination would hit the 192-bit security level suitable for intermediate
and root certificates. The combined public key size would be 97+48=145
bytes, and the combined signature size would be 224+96=320 bytes.
6.1
TiigerTLS
TiigerTLS [41] is a small footprint implementation of TLS1.3 [38] which
provides a TLS client written in C++ and Rust, and a TLS server written
in Rust.
It does not support versions of TLS earlier than 1.3.
Session
resumption is fully supported. It is primarily aimed at Internet of Things
applications, and so does not allocate any heap memory. It was designed
from the ground up with agility in mind, and hence easily adapts to novel
cryptographic primitives via its Security Abstraction Layer (SAL), a feature
that proved invaluable for this exercise. The distribution includes some tools
for certificate chain construction.
6.2
An implementation
We have implemented this proposal using TiigerTLS. We use the tools
provided there 1 to create a typical X.509 certificate chain which uses
SQIsign-3/Ed376 fused signatures as described above.
The signatures
and public keys are concatenated following the simple method used by the
Open Quantum Safe (OQS) project [42]. The leaf certificate uses a hybrid
1https://github.com/Crypto-TII/TLS1.3
15

level 1 ML-DSA/Ed25519 public key. The test implementation uses the
X25519MLKEM768 hybrid KEM.
We use this implementation to measure the actual traffic for a full hand-
shake between client and server, see Table 4. The server-to-client flow is the
most relevant protocol exchange, since it involves the transmission of the
certificate chain, authentication material, and the server contribution to key
exchange. In our prototype, this material requires only 6643 bytes, which
keeps the handshake comfortably below the rough 10kB region at which
larger certificate chains begin to become an issue. In a modern browser the
compute time is imperceptible to the client (although we acknowledge that
SQIsign verification is still slow compared with competing schemes [46] and
renders the Ed376 verification time negligible in comparison).
Table 4: TLS 1.3 handshake bandwidth
Phase
Bytes transmitted
Client to Server Hello
1450
Server to Client
6643
Client to Server Finish
64
In Table 5 we compare four configurations: classical TLS, a pure ML-
DSA authentication, an FN-DSA-based split design, and the fused SQIsign-
based design proposed here. One can see that a selective fused hybrid design
can reduce the bandwidth cost of post-quantum TLS authentication while
preserving the typical structure of TLS 1.3.
7
Conclusion
TLS supports multiple configurations, and many of these would affect our
findings. For example, optional client side PKI authentication would greatly
increase the client to server traffic. And other choices of PQ signature algo-
rithm for the leaf certificate (like FN-DSA) would further reduce server-to-
client traffic. Another contributing factor could be the adoption of certificate
compression [19].
Nevertheless, we conclude that an open mind should be kept regarding
the future of TLS in the context of the possible emergence of a CRQC. TLS
will need to change, but premature and ultimately unnecessary changes,
which impact agility, could do more harm than good.