Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords ⋆
Xuelian Cao1, Zheng Yang1, Jianting Ning2, Chenglu Jin3, Rongxing Lu4, Zhiming Liu1, and Jianying Zhou5
1 Southwest University, Chongqing, China
xueliancao7@email.swu.edu.cn, {youngzheng,Zhimingliu88}@swu.edu.cn
2 Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China
jtning88@gmail.com
3 Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, Amsterdam, Netherlands
chenglu.jin@cwi.nl
4 University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada
rlu1@unb.ca
5 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
jianying_zhou@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract. Group time-based one-time passwords (GTOTP) is a novel lightweight cryptographic primitive
for achieving anonymous client authentication, which enables the eﬀicient generation of time-based one-
time passwords on behalf of a group without revealing any information about the actual client’s identity
beyond their group membership. The security properties of GTOTP regarding anonymity and traceability
have been formulated in a static group management setting (where all group members should be determined
during the group initialization phase), yet, a formal treatment for real-world dynamic groups (i.e., group
members may join and leave at any time) is still an open question. It is non-trivial to construct an
eﬀicient GTOTP scheme that can provide a lightweight password generation procedure run by group
members and support dynamic group management, allowing group members to join and leave without
affecting other members’ states (non-disruptively). To address the above challenge, we first define the
notion and the security model of dynamic group time-based one-time passwords (DGTOTP) in this work.
We then present an eﬀicient DGTOTP construction that can generically transform an asymmetric time-
based one-time passwords scheme into a DGTOTP scheme utilizing a chameleon hash function family and
a Merkle tree scheme. Within our construction, we particularly tailor an outsourcing solution realizing
an issue-first-and-join-later (IFJL) strategy, enabling smooth joining and revocation without disrupting
other group members. Moreover, our scheme minimizes symmetric cryptographic operations and maintains
constant storage for group members, compared to the linear storage cost that grows rapidly with respect
to the lifetime of the GTOTP instance in the previous static GTOTP scheme. Our DGTOTP scheme
satisfies stronger security guarantees in a dynamic group management setting without random oracles.
Our experimental results confirm the eﬀiciency of our DGTOTP scheme.
Keywords: Group Time-based One-Time Passwords· Dynamic Group Management· Anonymity· Trace-
ability · Authentication· Security Model.
1
Introduction
Traditional user authentication relies on passwords, which are prone to hacking [26,34] and are not suitable
for authenticating a client’s device. To enhance the security of password-based authentication, Lamport [41]
(hereinafter referred to as the Lamport’81 scheme) first proposed the cryptographic notion of one-time passwords
(OTP), forcing users to frequently update their passwords for better security. To resist password reusing,
traditional OTP methods incorporate time constraints to yield an important variant named time-based one-
time passwords (TOTP), which is widely used in modern-day multi-factor authentication [27,22]. In a TOTP
scheme, each password can only be used within a pre-determined time slot (e.g., 30 seconds). A standard TOTP
(RFC 6238) [42] is implemented using traditional client and server shared secret keys and HMAC. This implies
that, in the RFC 6238 standard scheme, the server must store the user password generation key in plaintext.
If the server is compromised, the password seeds of all users will be leaked to the attacker, enabling further
impersonations. Hence, a TOTP scheme that can resist server compromise is desirable in practice.
Applying asymmetric key distribution is a standard way to achieve server-compromise resilience in TOTP.
That is, the server only stores the public verification key of the passwords instead of the password seeds. One
classic asymmetric time-based one-time passwords construction method is the one-way function (OWF) chain
structure introduced in the Lamport’81 scheme [41]. Each password is the seed (OWF pre-image) of the next
password, i.e., pwi := OWF(pwi−1). The last generated password is taken as the verification key, and the first
password is used as the password seed for all other passwords. Most of the state-of-the-art asymmetric time-
based one-time passwords algorithms adopt the framework of the Lamport’81 scheme, such as the T/Key [39]
⋆This is an extended version of the paper published at IEEE TIFS [11].

2
X. Cao et al.
and the TOTP schemes [35] used in the constructions of proof of aliveness protocols. Since most of the existing
TOTP schemes can be implemented with hash functions eﬀiciently, they can survive the quantum attacks with
an appropriate parameter setting [9,31,19]. This fact makes asymmetric TOTP schemes more appealing.
However, in traditional asymmetric TOTP schemes [39,35], each user in TOTP schemes has an independent
password verification key. As a result, TOTP can provide no privacy of user identity. In practice, entities
(e.g., mobile users and vehicles) in many applications (e.g., federated learning, indoor positioning, and V2X
communication) usually need to protect their identity privacy when sharing information or requesting services.
To protect user identity privacy in TOTP schemes, Yang et al. [56] recently proposed a cryptographic primitive
named group time-based one-time passwords (GTOTP), allowing users to prove their group membership to
arbitrary verifiers without revealing their real identity. It has been shown in [56] that GTOTP can be used as
a useful tool to build an eﬀicient privacy-preserving proof of location scheme (in which the distributed location
witnesses and prover can jointly use GTOTP passwords for anonymous authentication). The seminal GTOTP
scheme proposed by Yang et al. [56] (hereinafter referred to as YJN+ scheme) can generically transform an
asymmetric TOTP scheme into a GTOTP scheme based on a permutation scheme and a Merkle tree structure,
whose root is taken as the group public key. The Merkle tree leaves are bound to verification points of TOTP
instances of group members, where each verification point is just used in a short time period called verification
epoch. All leaves are randomly shuffled to achieve anonymity. However, the YJN+ scheme had certain limitations.
It only considered a static group, namely, the group structure needed to be established during initialization. This
assumption may not align with many real-world scenarios, such as business memberships and human resources
management, where group members can join and leave at any time. Another shortcoming of the YJN+ scheme is
its substantial storage overhead for group members. Suppose the YJN+ scheme is initialized with E verification
epochs for U pre-determined group members. Then, it must involve U ·E TOTP instances, which will be divided
into ϕ groups for building ϕ Merkle trees. The roots of the generated Merkle trees are inserted into a Bloom
filter, which is the final group public key. Therefore, the size of the group public key has a magnitude of O(ϕ),
which is not a constant. The password of a group member consists of the password of the original TOTP instance
and the corresponding Merkle proof, which is pre-stored by the group member. Namely, when we set ϕ = 1 to
have a constant size of the group public key, then each group member needs to store the Merkle proofs of all its
verification points that have a size of O(E · logU·E). Thus, the storage cost grows rapidly when a long lifetime
(large E) of the TOTP is expected.
Our Works. In this work, we take a significant step towards addressing the open question of building a
GTOTP scheme in a dynamic group setting. However, designing an eﬀicient dynamic time-based one-time
passwords (DGTOTP) scheme with provable security guarantees is not a trivial task. In general, we have two
main challenges. First, because group members may often use resource-constrained devices in practice, the
algorithms used by group members in DGTOTP need to be eﬀicient and avoid expensive public cryptographic
operations. Otherwise, if public cryptographic operations can be run eﬀiciently by group members, we can
use more powerful cryptographic primitives (e.g., dynamic group signatures [8]) instead to realize the similar
functionalities of DGTOTP. Second, the dynamic group management procedure for handling the joining and
leaving operations of a group member should not affect the local states of all the other group members. This
requirement is essential in many real-time applications (e.g., video surveillance and manufacturing execution)
where group members cannot be interrupted by any group update procedures. Such a requirement poses a
significant challenge in constructing a DGTOTP scheme.
To tackle the above challenges and requirements, we innovatively design an eﬀicient DGTOTP scheme
called DGTOne that provides provable security in our defined security model without random oracles. One of
the novelties is that DGTOne only needs each group member to run a few symmetric cryptographic operations
(e.g., pseudo-random function and hash function) and maintain a small constant-sized local state (either secret
or public). We present a novel issue-first-and-join-later (IFJL) strategy based on the chameleon hash function to
handle the join procedure and a creative outsourcing solution to realize eﬀicient password generation. According
to our IFJL strategy, a registration authority (RA), which takes charge of group management, first creates a
Merkle tree using dummy verification points as leaves, and then issues independent secret seeds for joined group
members on the fly. Each group member’s secret seed is used as the chameleon hash function secret key (and
many other secret keys) to dynamically bind a real verification point of a TOTP instance to a Merkle tree
leaf during password usage. The generation of Merkle proofs and chameleon hash public keys are outsourced
to RA, so each group member does not need to run any public key cryptographic operations. Moreover, such
an outsourcing procedure results in a cost-free revocation feature. That is, to revoke a group member, RA only
needs to stop generating chameleon hash public keys for it.
Furthermore, we also solve secure integration issues of DGTOTP passwords in practice. Unlike TOTP
schemes, (D)GTOTP passwords are supposed to be used at different verifiers, i.e., the passwords should be
publicly verifiable. However, a (D)GTOTP password itself does not provide any message authentication feature,
so it may be subject to password replay attacks in an arbitrary-verifier setting, where some verifiers may reuse the
received password to impersonate the password owner. Yang et al. [56] made the first attempt to solve this issue

Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
3
in a commitment-based message authentication scenario that uses a GTOTP password to commit a message
and open the password after it expires. One shortcoming of such a message authentication method is that its
verification suffers a long delay in waiting for the commitment to open. To overcome this limitation, we aim to
enhance the security integration of (D)GTOTP to realize a novel lightweight anonymous client authentication
approach with low latency in an arbitrary-verifier setting with usage privacy.
Our Contributions. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
– We define the notion and the security model of DGTOTP based on the framework of [56]. Compared with the
previous work, our security model particularly formulates the threats regarding dynamic group management.
In particular, we define new queries to simulate the joining of honest and malicious group members, and the
revocation feature.
– We design an eﬀicient DGTOTP scheme called DGTOne, leveraging a novel IFJL strategy we proposed.
DGTOne provides provable security in our newly defined security model without random oracles.6 In par-
ticular, our scheme requires no public key cryptographic operations for each group member. The storage
cost maintained by each group member is a relatively small constant, instead of O(E · logU·E) in [56]. The
revocation cost of DGTOne is optimal.
– We propose a security enhancement for resisting the password replay attacks in the traditional application
scenario regarding passwords over TLS [18,43]. In our solution, we develop a password usage token (i.e., the
hashes of a password and the verifier’s identity, respectively) and use a semi-honest authentication server
(AS) to record those password usage tokens for faithful-public retrieval. Meanwhile, the third-party AS only
needs to store each token for a short time, so it will not incur much storage overhead. Thus, it can ensure
that passwords are used at most by one verifier. In this way, a group member can instantly open the password
in a server-only authenticated TLS channel (where the server can be the verifier) to complete the client’s
anonymous authentication.
– We evaluate the performance of DGTOne on a mobile phone. The results show that the password generation
time is 119.5 microseconds on average. We also compare the performance of DGTOne with the YJN+ scheme
based on the main operations. Although DGTOne provides more features for dynamic group management, the
additional cost introduced to each group member is small and only consists of a few more modular additions
and multiplications.
Organizations. Section 2 describes the preliminaries. Section 3 defines the security notions of DGTOTP.
Section 4 introduces an eﬀicient DGTOTP scheme. Section 5 discusses possible use cases. Section 6 shows the
performance evaluation of our proposal. Section 7 presents the related work. We discuss privacy issues and a
further comparison with anonymous client authentication schemes in Section 8. Section 9 concludes the paper.
2
Preliminaries
We denote the security parameter by κ, an empty string by ∅, and the set of integers between 1 and n by
[n] = {1, . . . , n} ⊂N. We let x
$←X denote the operation of sampling x uniformly at random from a set X.
Let negl(κ) : N →R+ be a negligible function, i.e., for every polynomial P(κ) there exists a e0 ∈N s.t. for all
e > e0, negl(e) ≤1/P(e). Let ∥be the string concatenation operation, and # be an operation to calculate the
size of an element. In the following, we review the syntax and security definitions of the main cryptographic
building blocks of our upcoming constructions.
Time-based One-time Passwords. We consider an asymmetric TOTP scheme which consists of four algo-
rithms. Setup(1κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) takes as input the security parameter 1κ, the start and end times Ts and Te, and
the password generation interval ∆s, and outputs the password number pmsTOTP = N = (Te −Ts)/∆s. PInit(sd)
takes as input a secret seed sd ∈KTOTP, and outputs the initial verification point vp ∈VPTOTP, where KTOTP
is the key space for the input secret seed and VPTOTP is a verification point space. PGen(sd, T) takes as input
the secret seed sd and a time slot T, and outputs a one-time password pw ∈PWTOTP for T, where PWTOTP is
a password space. Verify(vp, pw, T) takes as input the verification point vp, a password pw, and time slot T, and
outputs 1 if the password is accepted and 0 otherwise. For tailoring the verification algorithm in our DGTOTP
constructions, we require that the verification point of the TOTP scheme can be computed based on the corre-
sponding secret seed sd or password. This requirement can be easily realized by any chain-based TOTP, such
as [39,35]. We define a security game GTOTP_Forge
A,TOTP
(κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) for a time-based one-time passwords scheme
TOTP in Figure 1, with a key space KTOTP for the input secret seed, a verification point space VPTOTP, and a
password space PWTOTP. We assume that the challenger keeps a system clock Tct which is updated every ∆s.
The goal adversary in the game is to forge a valid password of TOTP for a future time.
6 Cryptographic schemes proven secure in the standard model, where adversaries are restricted only by time and com-
putational power, are preferable. In this model, security analysis relies solely on the properties of the underlying
(mathematical) assumptions, without relying on (idealized) random oracles. Canetti et al. [10] showed that some
schemes secure in the random oracle model become insecure when used with specific hash functions.

4
X. Cao et al.
GTOTP_Forge
A,TOTP
(κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) :
Initialize(Ts, Te, ∆s) :
Finalize() :
pmsTOTP ←TOTP.Setup(1κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) IF ∃(pw∗, T ∗) ∈HD
sd
$←KTOTP
s.t. (TOTP.Verify(vp, pw∗, T ∗) = 1
vp ←TOTP.PInit(sd)
and no GetNextPw() at ˜T s.t. ˜T ≥T ∗
OUTPUT pmsTOTP, vp
OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT 0
GetNextPw() :
ReceivePw(pw) :
OUTPUT TOTP.PGen(sd, Tct)
APPEND (pw, Tct) →HD
OUTPUT TOTP.Verify(vp, pw, Tct)
Fig. 1: Procedures Used to Define Security for TOTP.
Definition 1. We say a TOTP protocol is secure if no PPT adversary has a non-negligible advantage
AdvTOTP_Forge
A,TOTP
(κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) := Pr
h
GTOTP_Forge
A,TOTP
(κ, Ts, Te, ∆s) = 1
i
with given parameters.
Pseudo-random Function Family. A pseudo-random function (PRF) family consists of two algorithms.
Setup(1κ) takes as input the security parameter 1κ, and outputs a random secret key k
$←KPRF and system
parameters pmsPRF, where KPRF is the key space. Eval(k, x) takes as input the secret key k and a message
x ∈MPRF, and outputs the evaluation result r ∈RPRF, where MPRF and RPRF are the message space and the
range space, respectively. For a specific PRF function family F, we may write F(k, x) to represent F.Eval(k, x)
for short. Let F be a pseudo-random function family associated with a key space KPRF, a message space MPRF,
and a range space RPRF. We define a security game GPRF
A,F(κ, qf) (see also in Figure 2) that is played between a
probabilistic polynomial time (PPT) adversary A and a challenger based on F and the security parameter κ.
During the experiment, the adversary is allowed to make the Challenge query only once and can issue at most
qf queries to FuncQ.
GPRF
A,F(κ, qf) :
Initialize() :
Finalize(b∗) :
(pmsPRF, k) ←F.Setup(1κ)
IF b∗= b and x∗/∈FL, OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT pmsPRF
ELSE OUTPUT 0
Challenge(x∗) :
FuncQ(x) :
b
$←{0, 1}; r0
$←RPRF; r1 ←F.Eval(k, x∗) APPEND x →FL
OUTPUT rb
OUTPUT F.Eval(k, x)
Fig. 2: Procedures Used to Define Security for PRF.
Definition 2. We say F is secure if the advantage AdvPRF
A,F(κ, qf) :=
Pr[GPRF
A,F(κ, qf) = 1] −1
2
 of any PPT
adversary A is negligible under κ.
Collision-resistant Hash Functions. A collision-resistant hash function CRH is defined by the following two
algorithms. Setup(1κ) takes as input 1κ, and outputs the parameter pmsCRH and a random key hk
$←KCRH,
where KCRH is the hash key space. Eval(hk, m) takes as input a random key hk and a message m ∈MCRH,
and outputs a hash value y ∈YCRH, where MCRH is the message space and YCRH is the hash value space. For
a specific collision-resistant hash function H, we write H(m) to represent H.Eval(hkCRH, m) when hkCRH is clear
from the context. The CRH security game GCR
A,H(κ) based on an adversary A and a CRH family H is defined in
Figure 3, where H has key space KCRH, message space MCRH and hash value space YCRH.
GCR
A,H(κ) :
Initialize() :
Finalize(m, m′) :
(pmsCRH, hk) ←H.Setup(1κ) IF m ̸= m′ and H.Eval(hk, m) = H.Eval(hk, m′)
OUTPUT hk
OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT 0
Fig. 3: Procedures Used to Define Security for CRH.
Definition 3. We say H is secure if no PPT adversary has non-negligible advantage AdvCR
A,H(κ) := Pr[GCR
A,H(κ) =
1] under κ.

Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
5
Chameleon Hash Function. We define a chameleon hash function by the following three algorithms. Setup(1κ;
rkCH) takes as input the security parameter 1κ, and a randomness rkCH ∈RCH for key generation, and outputs
the system parameters pmsCH, and a pair of secret and public key (skCH, pkCH) ∈KCH, where KCH is key space
and RCH is randomness space. Eval(pkCH, m, r) is an evaluation algorithm that takes as input a public key
pkCH ∈KCH, a message m ∈MCH and a randomness r ∈RCH, and outputs a value y ∈YCH, where MCH
and YCH are message space and hash value space, respectively. Coll(skCH, m, r, m′) is an eﬀicient deterministic
collision algorithm that takes as input the secret key skCH and tuple (m, r, m′) ∈MCH × RCH × MCH, outputs
a random value r′ ∈RCH such that CH.Eval(pkCH, m, r) = CH.Eval(pkCH, m′, r′). We require that the secret key
skCH can be eﬀiciently generated by rkCH. For example, for a discrete logarithm based CH, it is possible to set
skCH := rkCH. We define two standard security properties (i.e., collision resistance (CR) and uniformity (UN))
of a chameleon hash family CH in a single game GCHS
A,CH(κ) shown in Figure 4, where CH is associated with key
space KCH, randomness space RCH, message space MCH, and hash value space YCH.
GCHS
A,CH(κ) :
Initialize() :
Finalize(m, m′, r1, r2) :
rk
$←RCH
IF one of the following conditions is held:
(pmsCH, pk, sk) ←CH.Setup(1κ; rk)
i) m ̸= m′ and CH.Eval(pk, m, r1) = CH.Eval(pk, m′, r2);
OUTPUT pmsCH, pk
ii) r1 ̸= r2 and CH.Eval(pk, m, r1) = CH.Eval(pk, m, r2);
OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT 0
Fig. 4: Procedures Used to Define Security for CH.
Definition 4. We say CH is secure if no PPT adversary has non-negligible advantage
AdvCHS
A,CH(κ) := Pr[GCHS
A,CH(κ) = 1] under κ.
Merkle Tree. We define a Merkle tree scheme with three algorithms. Build({lfi}i∈[ℓ]) takes as input ℓdata
items (which form the leaves of the target tree) and builds a Merkle tree instance MTI on top of them. We will
reuse the notion of MTI to denote the root of the Merkle tree instance as well. Let H be a collision-resistant hash
function. Specifically, each non-leaf node is a hash value H(node.LeftChild||node.RightChild). GetPrf(MTI, lfi)
takes as input a Merkle tree MTI and a leaf lfi, and outputs a proof Pflfi that can attest the inclusion of lfi in
the tree. The proof Pflfi encompasses the siblings of every node on the path from lfi to the tree’s root MTI.
Verify(MTI, lfi, Pflfi) takes as input the root MTI, a leaf node lfi, and the corresponding proof Pflfi. It computes
a root MTI based on lfi and proof Pflfi, and returns 1 if MTI = MTI and 0 otherwise. For a secure Merkle
tree scheme, the adversary must not forge the Merkle proof for a leaf node that does not belong to the Merkle
tree. We define a security game GMT_Forge
A,MT
(κ) in Figure 5 for a Merkle tree scheme MT, which encompasses the
following procedures. For a secure Merkle tree scheme, the adversary must not forge the Merkle proof for a leaf
node which does not belong to the Merkle tree.
GMT_Forge
A,MT
(κ) :
Initialize({lfi}i∈[ℓ]) :
Finalize(lf∗, Pf∗) :
MTI ←MT.Build({lfi}i∈[ℓ]) IF 1 ←MT.Verify(Rt, lf∗, Pf∗)
OUTPUT MTI
and lf∗/∈{lfi}i∈[ℓ], OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT 0
Fig. 5: Procedures Used to Define Security for MT.
Definition 5. We say MT is secure if no PPT adversary has non-negligible advantage AdvMT_Forge
A,MT
(κ) :=
Pr[GMT_Forge
A,MT
(κ) = 1] under κ.
Unpredictable Permutation. We consider a keyed permutation scheme with two algorithms. Setup(1κ) takes
as input the security parameter 1κ, and outputs a random permutation key k
$←KPM and other the system
parameters pmsPM, where KPM is a key space. Shuﬄe(k, X) takes as input a permutation key k and a set of
elements X = {xi}i∈[n] ∈MPM of size n ∈N, and outputs a permuted set Y ∈MPM, where MPM is an
element space. In Figure 6, we define a security game GUP
A,PM(κ) that is played between a PPT adversary A and
a challenger based on a permutation scheme PM and the security parameter κ, where PM has the key space
KPM and the element space MPM.
Definition 6. We say PM is secure if for any PPT adversaries, the advantage AdvUP
A,PM(κ) :=
Pr[GUP
A,PM(κ) = 1] −1
2

is negligible under κ.

6
X. Cao et al.
GUP
A,PM(κ) :
Initialize(n) :
Finalize(β∗) :
(pmsPM, k) ←PM.Setup(1κ, n) IF β∗= β0, OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT pmsMT
OUTPUT 0
Challenge({xi}i∈[n], w0, w1) :
IF w0, w1 /∈[n] or w0 = w1 OUTPUT ⊥
{yi}i∈[n] := PM.Shuﬄe(k, {xi}i∈[n])
Let β0 and β1 be indices s.t. yβ0 = xw0 and yβ1 = xw1
OUTPUT {yi}i∈[n\{β0,β1}]
Fig. 6: Procedures Used to Define Security for PM.
Authenticated Symmetric Encryption. An authenticated symmetric encryption scheme ASE has three
algorithms. Setup(1κ) takes as input the security parameter 1κ, and outputs the parameter pmsASE and a
random key k
$←KASE, where KASE is the key space. Enc(k, m; re) takes as input an encryption key k, a message
m ∈MASE, and a random value re ∈RASE, and outputs a ciphertext C ∈CASE, where MASE is the message
space, CASE is the ciphertext space, and RASE is the randomness space. Due to the randomness r, the encryption
algorithm Enc is a probabilistic (randomized) algorithm. Dec(k, C) takes as input an encryption key k, and a
ciphertext C ∈CASE, and outputs a message m ∈MASE. Let ASE be an authenticated symmetric encryption
scheme associated with key space KASE, message space MASE, ciphertext space CASE, and randomness space RASE.
We define a security game GIND-CCA
A,ASE
(κ, qe) in Figure 7 to formulate the standard notion of indistinguishability
under chosen-ciphertext attacks (IND-CCA), that is played between a PPT adversary A and a challenger based
on ASE and κ. Meanwhile, the Challenge query can be made at most once, and the messages involved must have
equal lengths within the message space. Additionally, the DecP and the EncP = procedures can be queried at
most qe times, respectively.
GIND-CCA
A,ASE (κ, qe) :
Initialize() :
Finalize(b∗) :
Challenge(m0, m1) :
(pms, k) ←ASE.Setup(1κ) IF b∗= b and C∗/∈CL b
$←{0, 1}
OUTPUT pms
OUTPUT 1
C∗←ASE.Enc(k, mb)
OUTPUT 0
OUTPUT C∗
DecP(C) :
EncP(m) :
APPEND C →CL
re
$←RASE
OUTPUT ASE.Enc(k, m; re)
OUTPUT ASE.Dec(k, C)
Fig. 7: Procedures Used to Define Security for ASE.
Definition 7. We say ASE is secure if for any PPT adversaries, the advantage
AdvIND-CCA
A,ASE
(κ, qe) :=
Pr[GIND-CCA
A,ASE
(κ, qe) = 1] −1
2
 is negligible under κ.
3
Security Notions of Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
This section defines the security notions of DGTOTP.
Entities. In a DGTOTP scheme, there are three kinds of entities encompassing group members, verifiers, and
an honest registration authority (RA). Each group member has a unique identity ID. RA is trustworthy and
takes responsibility for initializing the system and enrolling group members.
Syntax. We define a DGTOTP scheme via the following eight algorithms and a sub-protocol.
– (pms, gpkG, GMG, RLG, skRA) ←RASetup(1κ, setpms): RA runs the system setup algorithm to initialize the
system based on the security parameter and the setup parameters setpms = (G, U, Ts, Te, ∆e, ∆s). This algo-
rithm outputs the system parameters pms, the initial group public key gpkG of a group G, the corresponding
initial group management message GMG, a revocation list RLG, and a secret key skRA
$←KRA for RA, where
KRA is a key space of RA, the parameter U ∈N specifies the maximum number of group members that a
group can hold, Ts and Te are the start and the end time of a DGTOTP protocol instance, ∆s is an interval
between two passwords, and ∆e is a parameter to define the verification epoch of a verification point of a
TOTP instance. The group management message GMG is stored privately by RA.
– (skIDj, vstIDj) ←PInit(IDj): A group member IDj runs the member initialization algorithm to generate its
secret key skIDj
$←KID and the initial verification state vstIDj, where KID is a key space of the group members.

Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
7
GGvar
A,Σ(κ, setpms) :
Initialize() :
Finalize(b∗, pw∗, T ∗) :
(pms, gpkG, GMG, RLG, skRA) ←Σ.RASetup(1κ, setpms)
ID∗:= Σ.Open(skRA, gpkG, pw∗, T ∗)
Create lists (CML, CSL, HML) ←∅
vr := Σ.Verify(gpkG, pw∗, T ∗, RLG)
Init a monotonically increasing (in ∆s) system clock Tct := Ts
i := ⌈T ∗−Ts⌉
∆e
; ˜
T ∗:= T ∗−((T ∗−Ts) mod ∆s)
OUTPUT pms, gpkG, RLG
IF Gvar = Corr and pw∗∈PL and (vr = 0 ∨ID∗/∈HML)
Challenge( ˆ
ID0, ˆ
ID1) :
OUTPUT 1
IF ( ˆ
ID0, ˆ
ID1) /∈HML or
ˆ
ID0 = ˆ
ID1
IF Gvar = Anony
OUTPUT ⊥
IF
ˆ
ID0 ∈(CML ∪OL) or
ˆ
ID1 ∈(CML ∪OL), OUTPUT ⊥
b
$←{0, 1}
IF b = b∗, OUTPUT 1
Switch to the next verification epoch
IF Gvar = Trace and vr = 1
sd ˆ
IDb ←Σ.GetSD(sk ˆ
IDb, Tct)
and
((
ID∗/∈(HML ∪CML)
)
∨
(
(pw∗, ˜
T ∗) /∈PL ∧ID∗/∈CML ∧sdi
ID∗/∈CSL
))
Switch to the next verification epoch
OUTPUT 1
OUTPUT sd ˆ
IDb
OUTPUT 0
Corrupt(IDj) :
AddHM(IDj) :
IF IDj /∈HML, OUTPUT ⊥
(skIDj, vstIDj) ←PInit(IDj)
CML ←IDj
(AxIDj, gpk′
G, GM′
G) ←Σ.Join(skRA, gpkG, IDj, vstIDj)
OUTPUT skIDj
HML ←IDj
CompromiseSD(IDj) :
OUTPUT AxIDj, gpk′
G, GM′
G[IDj]
IF IDj /∈HML, OUTPUT ⊥
AddMM(IDj, vstIDj) :
sdi
IDj ←Σ.GetSD(skIDj, Tct)
(AxIDj, gpk′
G, GM′
G) ←Σ.Join(skRA, gpkG, IDj, vstIDj)
CSL ←sdi
IDj
CML ←IDj
OUTPUT sdi
IDj
OUTPUT AxIDj, gpk′
G, GM′
G[IDj]
GetNextPw() :
ReceivePw(pw) :
FOR ∀IDj ∈HML:
OUTPUT Σ.Verify(gpkG, pw, Tct, RLG)
sdi
IDj ←Σ.GetSD(skIDj, Tct)
OpenID(pw, T) :
pwIDj ←Σ.PwGen(sdi
IDj, Tct)
ID := Σ.Open(skRA, gpkG, pw, T), OL ←ID
PL ←({pwIDj}IDj∈HML, Tct)
OUTPUT ID
OUTPUT {pwIDj}IDj∈HML
RevokeID(IDj) :
OUTPUT RL′
G ←Σ.Revoke(skRA, IDj, gpkG, RLG, GMG)
Fig. 8: Procedures Used to Define the Security of a DGTOTP Scheme.
– (AxIDj, gpk′
G, GM′
G) ←Join(skRA, gpkG, IDj, vstIDj): RA runs this join algorithm to handle the enrolment of
the group member IDj (who provides with its verification sate vstIDj) to the group with public key gpkG. It
returns the auxiliary information AxIDj as registration receipt to IDj, and updates the group management
message GM′
G and the group public key gpk′
G (if necessary).
– sdi
IDj ←GetSD(skIDj, T): A group member IDj runs this seed generation algorithm using its secret key skIDj
to compute the secret seed sdi
IDj ∈SDGTOTP for generating the password at T, where SDGTOTP is a secret seed
space.
– pwi,z
IDj ←PwGen(sdi
IDj, T): A group member IDj runs the password generation algorithm using its secret seed
sdi
IDj for the time slot T to generate the corresponding one-time password pwi,z
IDj, where z is an index of the
password in the i-th verification epoch defined by T.
– {0, 1} ←Verify(gpkG, pwi,z
IDj, T, RLG): A verifier runs the password verification algorithm based on the group
public key gpkG and the revocation list RLG to verify the the password pwi,z
IDj for the time slot T. This
algorithm outputs 1 if pwi,z
IDj is accepted, and 0 otherwise.
– RL′
G ←Revoke(skRA, IDj, gpkG, RLG, GMG): RA runs the revocation algorithm using its secret key skRA, the
revoking identity IDj, and the group management message GMG, to revoke the credentials of IDj with respect
to gpkG and update the revocation list to RL′
G.
– IDj ←Open(skRA, gpkG, pwi,z
IDj, T): RA runs the identity extraction algorithm using its secret key skRA to
extract the identity IDj of the owner of a password pwi,z
IDj w.r.t. the time slot T and group public key gpkG.
The algorithm outputs IDj if the extraction procedure is successful and ⊥otherwise.
Threat Model. We introduce the threats against DGTOTP in terms of the entities in the system following the
similar settings in literature (e.g., [14,39,33,52,23]). We assume a system that exists at least two honest group
members. In other words, most of the group members can be malicious and controlled by attackers. Those
malicious group members can be seen as insider threats against the privacy of other honest group members.
In the dynamic group management setting, an attacker may adaptively register new malicious group members
with arbitrary identities at any time. The verifier can also be malicious. The malicious group members and
verifiers may infer the private information of honest group members. Meanwhile, we consider RA to be a semi-
honest and non-colluding third party. RA might faithfully handle the enrolment of group members and trace
the identity of malicious group members but may be curious about how (where and when) those passwords are
used. We assume the attackers take control of the network traﬀic, so they can intercept, inject, and manipulate
the communication. In addition, the attackers may also try to either impersonate honest group members (i.e.,
breaking the traceability of DGTOTP) by forging their unused passwords or creating passwords that cannot

8
X. Cao et al.
be traced by RA.7 Like pseudonym schemes (e.g., [12,13,37,50]), attackers are interested in the privacy of an
honest group member’s passwords belonging to different verification epochs. That is, an attacker, who knows all
identities in a group, may try to link a password to the real identity of its owner (i.e., breaking the anonymity
of DGTOTP). However, we do not consider the privacy leakage from the usage pattern of passwords (in one
verification epoch). We present more discussions on the privacy issue in Section 8.
Security Definition. As DGTOTP is a lightweight cryptographic primitive, we here consider the most desirable
security properties we can achieve without introducing much performance overhead. We define the correctness
(Corr) and security properties of DGTOTP within a unified game-based framework [5]. The security properties
that we consider include the anonymity (Anony), and traceability (Trace) 8. Each property is associated with a
game indexed by a variable Gvar ∈{Corr, Anony, Trace}. These games consist of a series of procedures, as shown
in Figure 8, which are simulated by a challenger. An adversary can start a game by calling Initialize and end
the game with Finalize. All other procedures can be queried sequentially and adaptively by the adversary. The
adversary seeks to achieve its capabilities via given queries to meet the winning conditions (defined in Finalize)
of the corresponding game, i.e., resulting in Finalize(b∗, pw∗, T ∗) = 1.
The anonymity and the traceability are adapted from [56] but under a dynamic group member setting.
To generically model the attacks against join operations (e.g., malicious registration attacks and adaptive
chosen identity attacks), we allow an adversary to adaptively add (at any time of the game) either honest
group members via the AddHM procedure or malicious group members via the AddMM procedure, respectively.
Hence, an adversary can control those maliciously registered parties, which also covers insider threats. For a
malicious group member IDj, the adversary generates the verification state vstIDj, so the corresponding secrets
of IDj are not known to the challenger. The adversary can reveal an honest member’s long-term secret key
and secret seeds via Corrupt and CompromiseSD queries, respectively. This models the real-world compromise of
the credentials of an honest party (e.g., key stolen by insiders, poor key management, and cryptanalysis). The
password generation and verification procedures of honest group members are simulated by the GetNextPw and
ReceivePw procedures, respectively. The GetNextPw query is used to model the known password attacks that
require the leaked passwords of honest parties not to affect the security properties of their unexposed passwords.
Meanwhile, the ReceivePw procedure allows an adversary to test her forged passwords, exemplifying scenarios
such as impersonation attacks. The adversary can also revoke a group member anytime via the RevokeID
procedure. This procedure (working together with AddMM and AddHM procedures) can be used to model the
malicious capabilities of an adversary in manipulating the group organization structure and then inferring the
privacy information of other honest group members. In addition, an adversary can ask the OpenID procedure
to disclose the identities of passwords belonging to honest group members. For privacy, it is imperative that the
revelation of one password does not compromise the other unrevealed passwords.
Meanwhile, the anonymity requires that the adversary cannot distinguish which two honest members’ secret
seeds in the Challenge procedure. In addition, we impose the restriction that the Challenge procedure can be
invoked at most once during the game. The traceability requires that the adversary cannot generate a valid
password-time pair (pw∗, T ∗) that meets one of the following conditions: i) it is opened to an identity (including
⊥) which is not involved in any AddHM and AddMM queries; ii) it belongs to an uncorrupted honest party
(either its long-term key or secret seed for generating pw∗is not exposed) and is not generated by the challenger
in any procedure.
Definition 8. We say that a DGTOTP scheme Σ is correct if the probability Pr

GCorr
A,Σ(Gpm) = 0

≈1 holds for
any PPT adversary A and parameters Gpm = (κ, setpms) and setpms = (G, U, Ts, Te, ∆e, ∆s). We say that a cor-
rect Σ (with the above parameters) is secure if the advantages AdvAnony
A,Σ (Gpm) :=
Pr
h
GAnony
A,Σ (Gpm) = 1
i
−1/2

and AdvTrace
A,Σ (Gpm) := Pr

GTrace
A,Σ (Gpm) = 1

of any PPT A are negligible in the corresponding games.
Model Comparison. Our DGTOTP security model is strengthened and adapted from the static GTOTP
security model [56] though they have similar security properties. In Table 1, we summarize the differences
between these two models. Specifically, the GTOTP security model only formulates the selectively chosen
identity attacks. All identities should be chosen by the adversary (without being capable of choosing their secret
keys) at the beginning of the security game, and the adversary cannot revoke them. As a result, it cannot model
the group structure manipulation capabilities of the adversary as in our new DGTOTP model. Contrastingly, our
new model provides the AddHM, AddMM, and RevokeID procedures, allowing stronger adversaries to adaptively
manipulate the group structure at any time throughout the security game, including chosen identities and
credentials of malicious group members. In particular, the AddMM and the RevokeID queries empower adversaries
7 Namely, the traceability of DGTOTP, like group signatures [4,8], is formulated to cover both unforgeability and
accountability. Hence, traceability can deter malicious behavior within the group, thus mitigating insider threats (as
individuals may be less likely to engage in malicious activities if they know their actions can be traced by RA).
8 According to the two security properties, the adversaries can be divided into two types on breaking them respectively,
i.e., anonymity adversaries and traceability adversaries.

Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
9
to plant malicious insiders adaptively. Essentially, these new procedures strengthen the security properties of
anonymity and traceability of DGTOTP compared to the GTOTP security model.
Table 1: Model Comparison
Model
Adversarial Capabilities
Differences
Common Procedures
AddMM AddHM RevokeID
Init
Finalize, Challenge, OpenID
GetNextPw, ReceivePw
Corrupt, CompromiseSD
GTOTP
×
×
×
Keys & Parameters
& Group Members
DGTOTP
√
√
√
Keys & Parameter

[…middle truncated for length…]

 is shown in Figure 10 (b). For simplicity, we assume that the RA only cache the roots of sub-Merkle
trees.
Fig. 11: Runtimes of Verification.
Password Verification Time. Similar to the password generation, the performance of DGTOne.Verify needs
to compute N = 60 hash evaluations in the worst case, and compute N/2 times on average in the TOTP
verification. Meanwhile, it needs 1 hash evaluation and 1 chameleon hash evaluation to compute the Merkle
tree leaf. Moreover, the verifier should run U-1 times hash evaluations to generate the missing part of the
Merkle proofs in the worst case (in particular for the first time in that verification epoch). The Merkle proof
generation procedure of the verifier is only needed to run once in each verification epoch, and can run at idle
time. Therefore, it has not much impact on the performance of password verification. Alternatively, RA could
compute the whole sub-Merkle tree for the verifiers, but it may incur more communication overhead. Since U
might not be big, we assume that the verifier has enough storage to cache the internal node of the Merkle tree.
Such a cache strategy can facilitate the computation of the other Merkle proofs (PfMTIi
vpi
IDj ), which is free in the
average case. The verification of the Merkle proof associated with the password requires logU·E (i.e., the height
of the Merkle tree gpkG) times hash evaluations. Since the costs are dominated by the parameter U in the worst
case, we fix E = 630, 720 (for a six-year usage) in our measurements. We show the worst-case and average-case
performance of DGTOne.Verify in Figure 11 (a) and (b), respectively. The password verification time is in the
order of milliseconds (ms) which is eﬀicient.
Identity Open Time. The procedure of DGTOne.Open is similar to DGTOne.Verify. However, it does not need
to generate the Merkle proof anymore and has one more ASE decryption operation. The runtimes of it are shown
in Figure 12.
Fig. 12: Runtimes of Open.
Storage and Communication Costs. We consider the communication costs from the view of group members
and verifiers, respectively. The communication overhead of a group member is determined by the size of each
password, and it consists of 1 hash value with 256 bits, an identity ciphertext with 352 bits, and a 256-bit
chameleon hash collision. It is 864 bits in total. The communication and storage costs of the verifier are mainly
dominated by the sizes of a password and the group management messages downloaded from RA. In particular,
the downloaded message consists of U +logE hash values, U chameleon public keys (each of which has 520 bits),
and U ciphertexts. Figure 13 shows the storage costs of RA and verifier, respectively.
Fig. 13: Storage Costs of RA and Verifier.

20
X. Cao et al.
We further evaluate the communication cost over an LTE network with 16Mbps bandwidth. For our first
application, the TLS connection is implemented using javax.net.ssl to protect the communication between the
corresponding entities (considering the aforementioned use cases). Approximately, the communication delays
between the group member and the verifier are 0.45s (without TLS) and 0.9s (over TLS), respectively. The
data transfer time between the RA and the verifier (with TLS) for U = 5000 and E = 525600 (as an example)
is 1.25s. This delay is linear in U. However, such transmission is carried by each verifier only one time per
verification epoch, and can be done at idle time.
Table 2: (D)GTOTP Comparison
Schemes Group
Setting
Execution Time
Storage Cost (Byte)
Password
Size (Byte)
RASetup
PInit
Revoke
Join
GetSD
PwGen
GMUpdate
Verify
Open
Member
Verifier
RA
YJN+
Sta
Av
2U · E · H + ϕ · Bfi
E(60H + 2AESe)
-
-
2AESe
30H
-
(32 + log
U·E
ϕ )H
+1BFc
(32 + log
U·E
ϕ )H
+1BFc + 1ASEd
1004E · log
U·E
ϕ
+16
1.44ϵ · ϕ
16
76+
32 log
U·E
ϕ
Wo
2U · E · H + ϕ · Bfi
E(60H + 2AESe)
-
-
2AESe
60H + 2AESe
-
(62 + log
U·E
ϕ )H
+1BFc
(62 + log
U·E
ϕ )H
+1BFc + 1ASEd
DGTOne
Dyn
Av
(6U · E + U + 1)AESe
+U · E · CHe + E · PM
+(E · U −1)H + U · E · CHs
1AESs
1Ass 1AESe 2AESe
30H
(9U + 1)AESe + 1PM
+U(CHe + ASEe + CHs)
(32 + logU·E)H
+1CHe
(32 + logU·E)H + 1CHe
+1PM + 1ASEd + 3AESe
36
32 + 460U
+32logE 16 + 32E · logE
+32E + 5U
108
Wo
(6U · E + U + 1)AESe
+U · E · CHe + E · PM
+(E · U −1)H + U · E · CHs
1AESs
1Ass 1AESe 2ASEe 62H + 10AESe
+1ASEe + 1CHc
(9U + 1)AESe + 1PM
+U(CHe + ASEe + CHs)
(62 + logU·E +U)H
+1CHe
(62 + logU·E)H + 1CHe
+1PM + 1ASEd + 3AESe
6.2
Comparison
We mainly compare the group management setting and performance of our scheme with that of the YJN+
scheme [56] in the worst (Wo) case and the average (Av) case, respectively. We notice that YJN+ is the only
scheme that allows us to make a relatively fair comparison because they satisfy similar security properties and
functionalities. Both DGTOne and the YJN+ scheme provide anonymity and traceability, but DGTOne can
satisfy them under a stronger dynamic group management setting.
We conduct the performance comparison based on the main operations of the corresponding algorithms.
Here we compare the GVSTGen algorithm of the YJN+ scheme with DGTOne.RASetup since both of them
aim to generate the group public key (which is known as the group verification state in the YJN+ scheme).
The comparison results are shown in Table 2 (which also implies the results shown in the above figures).
Meanwhile, we let ‘BFc’ and ‘BFi’ denote the costs of the check and the insert algorithms of Bloom filter,
respectively. Moreover, we let ‘ASEe’ and ‘ASEd’ denote the encryption and decryption algorithms of AES-
GCM-SIV, respectively. The cost of the setup and the encryption algorithms of AES is denoted with ‘AESs’
and ‘AESe’, respectively. We also let ‘CHe’, ‘CHs’, and ‘CHc’ denote the costs of the evaluation, setup, and
collision algorithms of CH. The cost of permutation is denoted with ‘PM’.
Although DGTOne can offer more complex dynamic (Dyn) group management than the static (Sta) group
management in the YJN+ scheme, it does not introduce significantly higher overheads. In particular, for pass-
word generation, DGTOne incurs only a single additional chameleon hash collision evaluation (involving only
some modular additions and multiplications) and a few more eﬀicient symmetric cryptographic operations. As
RA is powerful, the additional costs incurred are tolerable. The costs increased to the verifier are also not
substantial. Moreover, our scheme has the advantage of shorter passwords sent by each group member. This is
achieved by outsourcing the computation of the Merkle proof of a password to RA and the verifier, respectively.
7
Related Work
(Group) Time-based One-time Passwords. To overcome the weakness of server compromise threat, the
recent time-based one-time passwords schemes prefer to adopt asymmetric key settings that can originate from
Lamport construction [41]. One-time passwords (OTP) as an important authentication factor has a long research
history that can date back to the seminal work by Lamport [41]. In recent years, Yu et al. [48] proposed a Time-
based OTP authentication via Secure Tunnel (TOAST) to use the seed value stored on mobile phones to create
OTP. Sun et al. [46] presented an OTP solution called TrustOTP to securely implement (existing) OTP schemes
(e.g., S/Key [29] and HMAC-based TOTP [42]) over smartphones that can resist malicious mobile OS. Kogen et
al. [39] revisited the Lamport scheme and proposed a variant with a tight security reduction in the random oracle
model. Jin et al. [35] presented the new proof of the Lamport scheme in the Standard Model and innovatively
used it to create a new cryptographic application called proof of aliveness.
However, the above-mentioned traditional TOTP schemes cannot provide anonymity since a party will only
use her TOTP passwords at the server (verifier) where she registered. Erdem et al. [24] develop a cloud-based
OTP service called OTPaaS for users. To achieve privacy, the users in OTPaaS need to register different
pseudonyms and user-memorable passwords at the service provider and OTP provider. However, it cannot
provide usage privacy against the OTP provider since the OTP provider needs to pair a user profile with a specific
service provider. Besides, OTPaaS is only designed for single-sign-on applications without considering some

Dynamic Group Time-based One-time Passwords
21
important security properties and functionalities of DGTOTP (i.e., group membership proofs, traceability, and
public verifiability). In order to achieve lightweight anonymous authentication with group membership proofs,
Yang et al. [56] recently generalized the asymmetric TOTP to a group setting to yield a new cryptographic
notion, named GTOTP. However, the first GTOTP construction introduced by Yang et al. does not support
dynamic group management, and suffers a large storage overhead at each group member.
Other Anonymous Authentication Techniques. In view of the importance of identity privacy protection in
real life, it has always been valued by cryptographers. After decades of development, many related anonymous
authentication technologies have been proposed. A classic technology to achieve identity privacy is to use
pseudonyms [12,59,55] to anonymously identify entities, which are usually implemented based on the existing
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). That is, each entity has a long-term fixed identity certificate issued by a
Certificate Authority (CA) used as its main certificate, and it also has a set of short-term identity certificates for
temporary use as a pseudonym. By frequently replacing pseudonymous certificates, entities can avoid privacy
threats such as long-term tracking and identity linking. However, common pseudonym technologies are not
required to provide either group membership proofs or traceability, unlike DGTOTP.
For the client-server authentication scenario (i.e., without RA), anonymous password-based authenticated
key exchange (APAKE) [51,54,49] is proposed to achieve anonymous-client session key establishment with
user-memorable passwords. However, to realize client anonymity, these schemes leverage expensive public cryp-
tographic primitives (such oblivious transfer [51,16], oblivious pseudo-random functions [30,49] and smooth pro-
jective hashing function [54,36]). Hence, APAKE protocols may not be eﬀicient enough for resource-constrained
devices. Also, they are not suitable for devices in Cyber-physical Systems that do not use user passwords. More-
over, the password verifier in APAKE has to be the server where the client is registered, so it cannot provide
public verifiability. On the contrary, one of our motivations for DGTOTP is to achieve public verifiability,
so that it can be used in many distributed applications (as presented in Section 5) in which the verifiers are
post-determined and can be arbitrary entities.
Another important cryptographic technique related to anonymous authentication is Group Signature (GS)
proposed by Chaum and Heyst [14], which allows a party to anonymously sign a message on behalf of a group.
To study the provable security of group signatures, Bellare et al. [4] first defined a formal security model of
static group signatures in 2003, which formally formulated many security threats faced by group signatures
as two security properties: anonymity and traceability. In this paper, Bellare et al. proposed a generic group
signature construction that can convert ordinary single-user digital signatures into group signatures through
non-interactive zero-knowledge proof technology (NIZK). Many recent group signature algorithms (e.g. [6,2,8])
adopted a similar construction framework.
We note that some public key cryptography (PKC) based anonymous authentication technologies (such
as pseudonym certificates and group signatures) can be used to implement DGTOTP. However, DGTOTP is
proposed as a lightweight anonymous authentication primitive. The main construction challenge is the perfor-
mance of the DGTOTP scheme on resource-constrained devices. Unfortunately, most PKC-based anonymous
authentication technologies involve many expensive public key cryptographic operations, so they cannot be used
eﬀiciently on resource-constrained devices.
Table 3: Comparison of Password-based (Anonymous) Client Authentication.
Password
type
Security Properties Group membership
proof
Public
Verifiable
Computation Overhead
Comm (Bytes)
Anony Trace UPriv
Client
Verifier
RA
[42]
Machine-usage
×
×
×
×
×
2H + 1TLS
2H + 1TLS
-
32
[48]
Machine-usage
+ User-Memorable
×
×
×
×
×
2H + 1TLS
2H + 1TLS
-
44
[24]
Machine-usage
+ User-Memorable
√
×
×
×
×
2H + 2TLS
2H + 2TLS
2H + 2TLS
44
[58]
User-Memorable
√
×
×
×
×
3GE + 2mGE + 1TLS
3GE + 1mGE + 1TLS
-
8192
[57]
User-Memorable
√
×
×
×
√
3ECM + 2H + 2TLS
6ECM + 2H + 2TLS
4ECM + 2H + 2TLS
129
Ours
Machine-usage
√
√
√
√
√
64H + 10AESe + 2ECM
+1ASEe + 1CHc + 1TLS
(64 + logU·E +U)H
+1CHe + 2ECM + 2TLS
(9U + 1)AESe + 1PM + 1ECM
+U(CHe + ASEe + CHs)
108
8
Discussions
Further Discussions on Privacy Issues. We do not consider privacy leakage caused by either the usage
pattern of passwords or human behaviors in one verification epoch. In practice, a group member may run various
applications using DGTOTP within one verification epoch. If two colluding verifiers belonging to different
applications, who verify the passwords using the identical verification point, may link the behaviors of the
corresponding group member across applications to learn extra privacy information, thus increasing the threats
of breach of anonymity. Group members should also be aware of this kind of threat while using DGTOTP
passwords. Such privacy leakage due to usage patterns also exists in other pseudonym schemes. To mitigate the
privacy leakage within one verification epoch, a naive solution is to shorten the lifespan of verification epochs (say

22
X. Cao et al.
one password per verification epoch). However, this solution may not be fit for the applications (e.g., distributed
privacy-preserving proof of location [56]) that need multiple passwords of a verification epoch. Alternatively,
a standard solution can be letting RA create multiple DGTOTP instances (which can run in parallel) for
group members, so each group member can use disjoint DGTOTP instances in different applications. The group
member can select an available DGTOTP instance for each application during the verification epoch without
binding it to a specific application.
Comparison with (Anonymous) Client Authentication Schemes. We compare our client authentication
scheme (i.e., the first use case shown in Section 5) with the password-based anonymous client authentication
schemes [58,57]. In addition, we also list the performance of the standard HMAC-based TOTP scheme [42], and
two (T)OTP-based authentication schemes TOAST [48] and OTPaaS [24] over secure channels for performance
comparison. Meanwhile, we assume that the HMAC-based TOTP is used to instantiate the generic TOAST
and OTPaaS frameworks in our comparison. We show the comparison results in Table 3. We assume each tuple
stored at the AS is signed using ECDSA to provide integrity. We let GE and mGE denote the exponentiation
and multi-exponentiation in a multiplicative group, respectively. And Let ‘ECM’ denote a point multiplication
in ECC. We abuse TLS to denote the cost of establishing a secure channel using it. In the comparison, we mainly
compare the security properties regarding anonymity and traceability, and the password usage privacy (UPriv)
to RA (or IdP). We also compare the main performance on computation overheads for client authentication
and client communication (Comm) over TLS. Password verifiability implies the usage scope in practice. The
main difference among the compared protocols is the password type which determines the applications of the
designed scheme. That is, our scheme is designed for the device of clients (with high entropy passwords). The
other two constructions [58,57] are based on user-memorable passwords (with low entropy). So our scheme can
be either used alone for machine authentication, or used as a second authentication factor to strengthen the user-
centric client authentication schemes. Nevertheless, our scheme provides more security guarantees and has fewer
client computation overheads. Although HMAC-based TOTP, TOAST, and OTPaaS are more eﬀicient than
DGTOTP, they cannot provide group membership proofs, traceability, and public verifiability as DGTOTP.
9
Conclusions
In this paper, we have defined the security notion for a dynamic group time-based one-time passwords scheme
(DGTOTP) by extending the framework of static GTOTP [56]. An eﬀicient DGTOTP is proposed to satisfy the
security of our defined model without random oracles. Our proposal can achieve constant-sized storage for group
members (via an elaborately tailored outsourcing approach) compared to the previous static GTOTP scheme.
We also presented a secure DGTOTP password application approach with low latency based on the context
of the traditional client authentication using passwords over TLS, that can particularly resist password replay
attacks in an arbitrary-verifier setting. This can make DGTOTP more practical in the real world. However,
since DGTOTP passwords are publicly verifiable, they can be used as a generic tool to build other distributed
privacy-preserving application protocols. That is, the verifier in such an application can be any entities beyond
a web server. Nevertheless, we encourage readers to explore more applications of DGTOTP.
As DGTOTP is in its early stages of development, there are still many open questions. For example, it
might be interesting to construct a DGTOTP scheme with stronger security (such as membership privacy [2]
and non-frameability [8]). It is also worthwhile to devise a DGTOTP solution with constant communication
costs at the verifiers. Another open challenge is to optimize the maximum number of members that can join,
particularly for a long life span, while ensuring eﬀiciency.