Practical Attacks on Session Messenger and Oxen Blockchain
Tingfeng Yu
School of Computing
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
Tingfeng.Yu@anu.edu.au
Thomas Haines
School of Computing
Australian National University
Canberra, Australia
Thomas.Haines@anu.edu.au
Abstract—Session is a decentralised secure (anonymous) mes-
senger that combines onion routing with the Oxen Proof-of-
Stake blockchain to provide metadata-private communica-
tion. Our study presents the first comprehensive analysis
of Session’s messaging protocol and its integration with the
Oxen blockchain. In analysing Session and the underlying
Oxen blockchain, we uncovered seven vulnerabilities.
Most notably we discovered flaws in the Oxen consen-
sus protocol which could allow network takeover in a realistic
setting, thereby undermining the integrity guarantees on
which Session’s anonymity layer depends. We also discovered
serious vulnerabilities in Version 1 of Session’s group chat
protocol. We conducted extensive simulations to analyse the
impact of these vulnerabilities and provide recommendations
to reinforce both the Oxen protocol and the Session client
to mitigate these attacks.
Index Terms—Session, Oxen, Proof-of-Stake, Blockchain,
anonymity, Onion Routing, secure messengers.
1. Introduction
The ongoing interest in secure communication has
instigated the development of various protocols and ap-
plications to provide robust security guarantees under
different settings. Some widely adopted protocols such as
the Signal Protocol, including the subprotocols X3DH [1],
Double Ratchet [2], and Sesame [3], have been analysed
extensively by past research [4]–[6], and their end-to-end
guarantees (confidentiality, authenticity, forward and post-
compromise secrecy) are now fairly well understood.
However, their threat models implicitly assume an
adversary who can intercept or tamper with traffic, but:
• either gains no value in identifying the patterns of
communication, or
• cannot observe the entire network.
In practice, state–level surveillance [7] and large-scale
traffic correlation by vendors [8] already stretch this as-
sumption. A global passive adversary who can eavesdrop
on every link in the network can gain valuable information
solely from the metadata associated with the end-to-end
encrypted message content. Protecting metadata therefore
demands protocols that offer an additional notion of se-
curity, metadata privacy or anonymity, in addition to the
content-layer security.
Session [9] is an instant messenger developed by
the Oxen Project in 2020. It aims to meet this stronger
goal by leveraging a decentralised onion routing network
to minimise metadata exposure. Session’s onion network
relies on Oxen, a Proof-of-Stake (PoS) blockchain, as an
append-only public ledger that reflects network changes,
e.g., new nodes joining the network, nodes being removed
from the network, aiming to provide a resilient and trans-
parent view of the network; a security compromise of
Oxen can be exploited to break anonymity in Session.
Despite having an open-source codebase and mil-
lions of users [10], Session and its underpinning Oxen
blockchain still lack an up-to-date, systematic description
of its protocols, and have never been subjected to peer-
reviewed study. The public whitepapers for Session and
Oxen omit implementation details and have not been
revised to reflect protocol changes introduced by later
hard-forks; also missing are detailed security claims and
argumentation. The lack of existing analysis, esoteric de-
sign, and large user base make it an interesting object of
study. The only publicly available assessment of Session
to date was a security audit commissioned from Quarkslab
in May 2021 [11], where auditors examined the Session
client implementation for different platforms. However,
the analysis was limited to the client software and focused
on classical application security issues, such as local data
protection and certificate handling. Crucially, assessment
of Session’s protocol design was out of scope of the
assessment. We aim to close these gaps by providing the
first protocol security assessment of the Session and the
Oxen blockchain and uncover vulnerabilities hidden from
pure application testing.
1.1. Contributions
We present the first security analysis of Session and
its integration with Oxen. Our main contributions are:
Comprehensive view of Session’s protocol stack (§3)
We extract and formally document the core protocols
of Session and Oxen, filling numerous gaps in the
public whitepaper.
Four consensus-layer vulnerabilities in Oxen (§4)
• OV1 and OV2. Quorum bias: We discovered that
two Oxen quorums (Pulse for block production,
and Obligation for performance monitoring) are
mutually influential.
OV1 and OV2 show how an attacker-dominated
quorum can deterministically skew the member-
ship of the other quorum in the very next block,
snowballing its control over future rounds.

• OV3. Insufficient vote validation: The network ac-
cepts duplicate, early or late quorum votes, al-
lowing malicious quorums to create repeated or
premature/overmature network state changes to its
advantage, vastly exacerbating OV1 and OV2.
• OV4. Immediate deregistration: missing protocol
integrity checks allow malicious obligation quo-
rums to bypass the intended pipeline for punishing
under-performing nodes, by irreversibly removing
honest nodes from the network.
We combine OV1–OV4 into practical network-
takeover attacks and evaluate their feasibility under
both simulation and emulation (§6), showing that
≤30% adversarial stake suffices to control the entire
network within ≈4 days; should such an attack occur
it would force the system to hard-fork to recover,
possibly irreversibly undermining trust in the system.
Three client-level attacks on Session (§5)
• SV1. Seed-node bias: Session clients rely on seed
nodes to learn the onion routing network. We dis-
covered that a single malicious seed node can sup-
ply a fully adversarial service-node list to clients,
subverting onion-path anonymity.
• SV2. Inadequate rekeying: In group chat protocol
version one, an incomplete re-key procedure allows
departed members to read future messages.
• SV3. Closed-group privilege escalation: In group
chat protocol version one, inadequate access con-
trol lets any member impersonate the sole admin
when inviting new users; in the current protocol
version (version two), we observe a weaker privi-
lege escalation where an attacker can impersonate
admin actions in members’ UI, though without
altering actual group state.
Mitigations (§7) We propose changes which either patch
or partially mitigate the vulnerabilities in Oxen and
Session; unfortunately, in several cases a complete
patch is not possible because the vulnerability is
inherent to the design.
1.2. Responsible disclosure
All confirmed vulnerabilities were privately disclosed
to the Oxen developers on the 16th of July 2025, along
with outlined mitigations that eliminate the demonstrated
exploits. At the time of writing, the developers have
implemented mitigations which are currently deployed on
the testnet and staged for release to the mainnet.
1.3. Paper Structure
In Section 2 we provide the necessary preliminary
knowledge on relevant constructions (onion routing and
blockchain) and survey literature on secure messengers.
In Section 3, we present the protocol details for the
implementation of Session and Oxen. Section 4 and
Section 5 detail the seven protocol-level and consensus-
level vulnerabilities we uncover. Section 6 shows how
these consensus-level vulnerabilities compose into prac-
tical network-takeover attacks and evaluates their impact
through both simulated and emulated experiments. Sec-
tion 7 presents defences for each identified vulnerability,
and Section 8 concludes our work.
2. Background
This section covers both preliminary background ma-
terial for the techniques used in Oxen and Session, and
related work on other secure messengers.
2.1. Preliminaries
Session and Oxen combine several common tech-
niques in unusual ways. Our preliminaries will first cover
the relevant techniques related to onion routing before
covering those related to blockchain.
2.1.1. Onion Routing. Onion routing [12] is a classic
approach to achieve sender–receiver unlinkability by lay-
ering secure public-key encryption with multi-hop for-
warding. A client who wishes to message dest picks a
random path of k relay nodes h1, . . . , hk and wraps the
payload in k nested encryptions:
ck = Encpkhk
 addrdest, m

ci−1 = Encpkhi−1
 addrhi, ci

for i = 2 . . . k
with c0 sent to N1. Each relay Ni uses its private key
to decrypt ci, learns the next hop addr Ni+1, and forwards
ci+1 onwards; the final relay then passes the message m,
which is normally also encrypted, to the destination.
Early designs of onion routing assumed a known and
static set of relays, leaving the peer discovery process
outside the protocol model. However, it has become an
important component in deployed onion routing networks,
as network topology and node availability likely change
over time. Modern implementations such as Tor [13] rely
on trusted directory authorities to publish relay informa-
tion and maintain network consensus.
Onion routing provides effective protection against a
local or partially-observing adversary, but breaks down
under a global passive attacker who can observe the
traffic on every link in the network, e.g., (Alice →N1,
N1 →N2 →Bob). Leveraging timing correlations be-
tween outgoing and incoming packets of every node in the
network allows them to infer the origin and destination of
a message despite the layered encryption and relaying.
To mitigate simple intersection or timing attacks, many
onion networks may inject dummy/cover messages at
random intervals, so that an observer cannot tell which
packets carry real payloads (as in modern Tor clients).
2.1.2. Blockchain Fundamentals. A blockchain is an
append-only, distributed ledger in which every block con-
tains a hash pointer to its predecessor, forming a chain.
Following Nakamoto’s foundational Bitcoin proposal [14],
blockchains have been generalised into many settings.
A secure blockchain offers two key properties under
partially-synchronous network and Byzantine faults [15]:
• Consistency (Safety): Honest nodes eventually agree
on the same prefix of blocks; no two honest nodes
will indefinitely maintain conflicting histories.
• Liveness: New, valid transactions submitted by hon-
est clients will eventually be accepted and finalised
in the ledger; the chain will not stall forever.
Achieving both properties under realistic network con-
ditions, with message delays, dropped packets, and po-
tentially malicious actors, is what consensus protocols

like Proof-of-Work (e.g. Bitcoin) or Proof-of-Stake (e.g.
Ouroboros) are designed to guarantee.
Consensus definitions. The consensus mechanism
is a fundamental component of a blockchain. It defines
how a distributed network agrees on the next block in
the presence of Byzantine faults like message delays and
active adversaries. Consensus mechanisms in distributed
systems are often analysed in the Byzantine fault tolerant
(BFT) model, where nodes may behave arbitrarily due
to faults or adversarial control. Classical results show
that deterministic consensus can tolerate at most f mis-
behaving nodes among 3f + 1 participants [16], [17].
Therefore, classical BFT protocols tolerate fewer than
one third Byzantine participants. However, blockchain
protocols rely on different models and may aim to tolerate
different adversarial thresholds. There are two widely
used paradigms for consensus mechanisms, Proof-of-
Work (PoW) and Proof-of-Stake (PoS).
Proof-of-Work was introduced by Nakamoto in Bit-
coin [14], PoW ties voting power to computational effort:
the more hash rate a node controls, the greater its proba-
bility of mining the next block. While this approach has
proven robust, it carries two well-known drawbacks:
• the energy cost of sustained hash computation, and
• a tendency towards centralisation as economies of
scale favour large mining pools.
Proof-of-Stake was proposed on the Bitcoin Forum
[18] as a natural alternative to the energy-intensive mining
of PoW. It was subsequently implemented in PeerCoin
[19] and formalised in later works [20], [21]. In PoS
blockchains, voting power is proportional to the stake
of a participant rather than computational power; the
definition of stake varies between implementations but the
idea is that the validators’ voting power is constrained
by their share of the currency and if they misbehave
they can be financially penalised. By shifting the resource
from computing power to capital at risk, PoS aims to
broaden participation, reduce energy consumption, and
mitigate miner centralisation. Part of the success of PoS
blockchains could be attributed to the fact that entities
who are capable of mounting attacks must hold significant
stake, and the stake value is tied to the reputation of the
system, which would be undermined by attacks.
2.1.3. Proof-of-Stake Mechanics. Proof-of-Stake (PoS)
uses a stake-weighted lottery, meaning that the probability
of participants being elected to create the next block is
proportional to the stake they own. A PoS blockchain
needs to solve the following problems:
Committee election. How to sample block pro-
posers and validators based on stake? An example is
the VRF-based self-sortition used by Algorand [22] and
Ouroboros Praos [23], where each node self-checks eli-
gibility with a sortition function. Let s denote the user’s
stake, S the total stake, R the public randomness derived
from the current chain state. the sortition function outputs
a hash vsel, a proof πsel, and a selection result jsel:
(vsel, πsel, jsel) ←Sortitionsk
 s, R, S

.
The Sortition function has two layers:
• Verifiable Random Function (VRF): A VRF [24] is
a pseudorandom function with a publicly verifiable
proof of correctness. Sortition algorithm evaluates
a VRF on the public randomness R, produces a
hash and proof: (vsel, πsel) ←VRFsk(R). The proof
allows anyone to verify the hash using the public key
corresponding to sk but does not allow the adversary
to predict ahead of time what effect the randomness
will have on the honest user’s selection.
• Stake-Proportional Selection: An algorithm that pro-
duces a selection outcome jsel given the VRF output,
with the likelihood of selection proportional to the
user’s stake Pr[jsel > 0] ∝s/S. A node is eligible
in the round iff jsel = 1.
Honest nodes reveal their eligibility by broadcasting
(vsel, πsel, jsel). Because the VRF output is unpredictable,
and the threshold depends only on the public stake ratio
s/S, the election is provably fair as no adversary can bias
vsel after seeing the public randomness.
Randomness maintenance. How to generate unbi-
ased public randomness for future committee election?
The security of a PoS blockchain relies on its randomness,
which must be unpredictable until the current block is
final and bias-resistant such that no adversary can skew
the randomness to gain advantages in future committee
selections. Randomness maintenance in deployed PoS
blockchains (e.g., Praos and Algorand) often involves two
scales: per-block randomness produced by each block
proposer, and the public randomness aggregated from a
window of per-block randomness. The latter is used for
committee selection.
2.2. Related Work
Messaging systems without extensive analysis are
prone to security vulnerabilities, even when they are de-
ployed in applications used by millions of users globally;
we discuss a few examples. Signal’s double-ratchet and
X3DH handshake protocols have been formalised and
proven to provide strong guarantees such as forward and
post-compromise secrecy [25], [26]. However, implemen-
tation analysis of the Signal Android client and server
code from [27] discovered that the notion of forward
secrecy and future secrecy are too weak at a code level,
despite both properties being proven to hold in theoretical
evaluation of the protocol. Additionally, researchers dis-
covered that the Signal app does not have one of its docu-
mented features: the Sesame algorithm, a session manage-
ment algorithm developed to extend the Signal Protocol
to a multi-device setting [3], was not fully implemented in
the app as the session recovery mechanism was missing.
Similarly, reverse-engineering and formal analysis work
on Threema, a proprietary secure messenger, uncovered
design flaws that enable message duplication, denial-of-
service, and key-recovery attacks [28].
Another strand of research on secure messengers fo-
cuses on anonymity. While most secure messengers aim to
provide strong security guarantees to protect the message
content, the network-level metadata associated with these
packets often reveals sensitive information, such as the
sender and receiver information (e.g., IP address), and
other details that can potentially be used to infer the
nature of the conversations, or the sender-receiver identity.
Several deployed messengers have taken network-level
privacy into their security goals:

• Bridgefy [29] uses a mesh-network design to facili-
tate decentralised messaging;
• xxMessenger [30] uses cMix [31], [32], a low latency
mixnet as its anonymity layer;
• Briar [33], Ricochet [34], and Session [9] use onion
routing.
Tor [13], the most widely deployed onion-routing
network, has influenced the design of several instant
messengers. Both Ricochet and Briar use Tor to provide
metadata privacy. However, Tor’s peer discovery process
relies on a small set of trusted directory authorities which
raises concerns about centralisation and single points of
failure. Motivated by these concerns, the Loki Foundation
(later rebranded to the Session Foundation) proposed the
LokiNet, a custom onion routing network for Session [35],
to replace directory servers with the Oxen proof-of-stake
blockchain, where Oxen provides a decentralised public
record of the onion relay network state.
Despite the widely recognised importance of metadata
hiding in the field of anonymity research, systems that
promise metadata privacy remain relatively understudied.
Among the four metadata-private messengers listed above,
only Briar and Bridgefy have received published security
analyses. Song’s study of Briar [36] provides the first com-
prehensive documentation of its bespoke protocol stack,
while Albrecht et al. [37] reverse-engineered Bridgefy’s
Bluetooth-mesh protocol and uncovered multiple flaws
that break the application’s privacy claims.
However, findings of these works are closely tied to
the design of the respective systems. Session differs sub-
stantially in its architecture, and therefore insights from
these studies are not directly transferable. Session is not
the first messenger that relies on Onion-routing, but the
first that uses a blockchain consensus layer to govern the
routing infrastructure. To our knowledge, Oxen’s proof-of-
stake consensus has not previously been studied. Vulnera-
bilities at this layer could allow adversaries to manipulate
quorum decisions and influence the composition of the
routing network itself, fundamentally undermining the
privacy of Session. To bridge the gap, we provide the
first in-depth analysis of Session and Oxen, focusing on
the quorum mechanisms that determine the set of service
nodes operating the onion routing network.
3. Implementation Analysis
In this section, we first describe what security claims
Sessions and Oxen make, before presenting the core
protocols of both systems as implemented. We begin
with Session’s decentralised architecture: its end-to-end
encrypted messaging protocol, swarm-based storage, and
onion-routing network. We then turn to Oxen, the PoS
blockchain that underpins Session’s integrity.
3.1. Security Properties
Ratings of secure messengers are a common topic in
blog posts, published by various companies and media
outlets; such rankings often rate Session very highly for
security [38]–[41]. However, to the best of our ability to
tell Session makes only a few informal security claims and
no formal (in the academic sense) claims. It is possible to
infer certain security objectives from the design decisions
and by analogy to other PoS blockchains.
Before introducing these security properties, we first
explain the role of Oxen blockchain in relation to Session.
Session uses an onion routing network to provide metadata
privacy, which relies on the Oxen blockchain to maintain
a decentralised and consistent view of active peers/service
nodes and to incentivise the peers to participate. This is
similar to the blockchain network underlying the deploy-
ment of cMix [30]. While the developers do claim that
“By using this network, Session doesn’t have a central
point of failure, and Session’s creators have no capacity
to collect or store personal information about people using
the app." [42] the references in the white paper focus on
the financial incentive side more than security [43]. Our
analysis, particularly vulnerability SV1 (5.1), suggests that
the Session approach does not offer any advantages over
the centralised directory service approach taken by Tor.
In this study, we focus on the security properties of
Oxen’s consensus mechanisms for Pulse and Obligation
quorum (discussed later), both quorums produce decisions
that affect service node state. Since Oxen does not appear
to publish a formal security model for either quorum,
we extract the following intended properties from the
design rationale in oxen-improvement-proposals, and the
implementation oxen-core:
P1 Deterministic quorum selection: Given
the
same
chain state, all nodes deterministically derive the
same quorum composition.
P2 Threshold authorisation: A
quorum
decision
is
valid only if it is authorised by the protocol-defined
threshold of members.
P3 Temporal quorum authority: A quorum can exer-
cise its authority only for its designated round, height,
or bounded validity window.
P4 Quorum selection fairness: A party’s influence over
quorum selection outcome should be determined only
by its stake fraction and the distribution induced
by protocol randomness, it cannot be increased by
deviating from honest execution.
Oxen service nodes may undergo state changes autho-
rised by Obligation quorums, which implies:
P5 State change integrity: Every accepted state change
must represent a legal transition given the service
node’s state.
3.2. Methodology
We studied Session and its surrounding stack based on
the official specification and implementations:
• session-android
(commit:
bdb6e7d
and
e4c16ae): the Android client of Session. Commit
bdb6e7d corresponds to the group chat protocol v1
(the version current at the start of our study), while
e4c16ae implements v2, which we also examined
to assess the current state of the protocol.
• oxen-core (hard fork: 22, commit: 55f6f10): im-
plementation of the Oxen blockchain protocol, in-
cluding the consensus protocol, transaction valida-
tion, and peer-to-peer communication with service
node management (e.g., swarm updates).

Our methodology combined specification review with an
implementation-level audit. We conducted a manual code
review of the Session and Oxen repositories to extract
the underlying protocols, cross-checking them against the
official specifications and reconstructing missing/outdated
details; some properties of the protocol only become
apparent during our emulation and simulation. To further
our analysis and provide empirical proof of our findings:
• we developed a patched Session client for validating
attacks on group chat;
• we deployed a local testnet to validate the presence
of several Oxen protocol vulnerabilities;
• we implemented a lightweight simulation of Oxen,
parameterised
to
reflect
mainnet
conditions,
to
demonstrate the practical exploitability of network-
takeover attacks (Section 6).
3.3. Session
In Session, messages are relayed and stored by a
distributed onion-routing network of Service Nodes. Each
Service Node fulfills three roles:
• Onion router: forwards layered (onion) encryption
packets across three-hop paths.
• Storage server: stores offline messages for its as-
signed users.
• Blockchain worker: validates Oxen consensus and
records state changes, which in turn drive swarm
rebalancing and node-register/deregister events.
Service Nodes are logically grouped into swarms for
message storage. Each swarm has 5–9 Service Nodes.
Oxen’s deterministic, block-triggered swarm assignment
algorithm uses a pseudorandom generator seeded by the
block’s hash to rebalance underfull (< 5 nodes) and
overfull (≥10 nodes) swarms toward the ideal size of
seven. All incoming Session messages are redundantly
distributed across nodes in that swarm.
Figure 1 defines the key notations and data types
for later references. Each service node maintains a local
view of the network state S : State. In addition, we
use snsa and snsd to represent the list of active ser-
vice node (nodes that are currently participating in the
network) and decommissioned service nodes (nodes that
have failed performance checks but have not yet been de-
registered from the system), where S.sns = snsd
S snsa
and ∅= snsd
T snsa. We now illustrate Session’s core
protocol by tracing the workflow from onboarding to
sending the first end-to-end message.
3.3.1. Onboarding. A new client generates a random
seed, from which it derives two long-term key pairs:
• An Ed25519 signing key pair (skid
s , pkid
s ), computed
from the padded seed. The public key pks serves as
the user’s Session ID.
• An X25519 keypair (skenc
s , pkenc
s ), derived from the
Ed25519 key pair via Curve25519 conversion, is used
as the client’s identity key within libsignal (imple-
menting the end-to-end encryption part of the Signal
protocol) for end-to-end encryption.
To use Session’s onion routing network, a new client
would also fetch the snsa via one or more seed nodes (a
hard-coded service node that bootstraps network entry);
the exact details lead to a vulnerability (Section 5.1).
3.3.2. Contact Discovery. To send a message, the sender
must first obtain the recipient’s public identity key pkid
r
and encryption key pkenc
r
out-of-band.
3.3.3. Message Sending. The complete message-sending
flow is illustrated in Figure 2, which corresponds to the
five steps described below.
1) E2E encryption: Let pkid
s be the sender’s signing
key/Session ID and pkenc
r
the recipient’s encryption
key. The sender binds the message to itself and the
recipient by signing
σ ←Signskid
s
 m∥pkid
s ∥pkenc
r

.
Form the payload p ←m∥pkid
s ∥σ, then E2E encrypt
p with Enc(·) (Algorithm 1):
ce2e ←Enc(pkenc
r
, p),
where Enc(pk, p) denotes a hybrid encryption that
takes a payload p and an X25519 public key pk as
input. It first generates an ephemeral X25519 key-
pair; then derives a symmetric key from ECDH and
HMAC, and encrypts the payload with AES-GCM.
Algorithm 1: Enc(pk, p)
Output: c∥epk: ciphertext c and ephemeral
public key epk
Operation:
1
(esk, epk) ←X25519.EphemeralKeyGen()
2
k ←HMAC“LOKI”
 ECDH(esk, pk)

3
c ←AES-GCM.Enck(p)
4
return c∥epk
2) Peer Swarm Discovery: To contact a recipient, the
client must resolve the recipient’s Session ID pkid
r to
the recipient’s swarm. The client submits pkid
r to a
Service Node in snsa via the getSwarm(pkid
r ) API.
The node deterministically maps pkid
r 7→idswarm and
returns the swarm description swarmr, i.e., a set of
Service Nodes specified by onion address, port, and
public key:
swarmr : SNode[] ←getSwarm(pkid
r )
3) Onion construction: The client selects three random
Service Nodes (h1, h2, h3) and one destination node
d from the recipient’s swarm, then constructs the
onion-encrypted ciphertext by wrapping the E2E en-
crypted payload (pe2e ←pkid
r ∥ce2e) outward, from
the destination node to the guard, by repeated ap-
plications of Enc(·) (Algorithm 1). The resulting
layered onion construction is as follows:
cd ←Enc(pkenc
d , pe2e), pd = pkid
d ∥cd
. . .
ch1 ←Enc(pkenc
h1 , p2), onion = ch1
4) Relay: The onion is sent to the guard h1; each hop
hi peels off its layer using the encryption secret key,
revealing the next hop (addressed by its public key
pkid
hi+1) and the remaining onion. The peeled onion
is then forwarded along the path until the destination
node, which fully decrypts the innermost payload,

• SNode := {pk, lastPulse, active, . . . }: a service node record consisting of the node’s public key, the block
height (lastPulse) at which it last participated in Pulse (see Sec.3.4.1), and its activeness active ∈{⊤, ⊥}.
• Block := {blockHash, pulseRand, txs, . . . }: a blockchain block containing its hash, a randomness field, and
transaction references.
• OQ := {V, W}: an Obligation quorum, containing the validators’ public keys V , workers’ public keys W.
• PQ := {p, V }: a Pulse quorum, containing the block producer’s key p and validators’ keys V .
• StateChange ∈{REG, DEREG, DECOM, RECOM, NOOP}: the type of service node state transition.
• Tx := {height, sc, iw, votes}: a state-change transaction record, where height is the cached height for the
Obligation quorum, sc is the state change operation, iw is the index of the target worker within the relevant
Obligation quorum, and votes = [(v1, σ1), . . . , (vm, σm)] is the list of validator indices and signatures.
• State : {B : Block[], sns : SNode[], txs : Tx[], Q : OQ[]}: The network state, consisting of the blockchain, service
nodes in the network, pending transactions, and cached Obligation quorums.
Figure 1: Notation
obtaining the E2E encrypted message addressed to
the receiver: pe2e := pkid
r ∥ce2e. The destination node
d broadcasts the message to all nodes in the swarm,
each will retain the message for retrieval.
5) Message Retrieval: The receiver polls its swarm for
incoming messages. The requested swarm node will
return any messages with a matching Session ID pkid
r .
It is clear that if all three Service Nodes in the chosen
path are adversarially controlled then the message sending
protocol provides no anonymity; this is a common limi-
tation of any system attempting to distribute trust but the
vulnerabilities in Oxen allow the adversary to control all
active Service Nodes within the threat model.
3.4. Oxen
The Oxen blockchain serves as a public ledger for the
network state, where blocks are produced through quorum
consensus and state changes are logged on-chain as trans-
actions. The two quorums that are particularly relevant to
this paper are the Pulse quorum for block creation, and the
Obligation quorum for node activity monitoring. Table 1
shows the essential network parameters used by Oxen’s
mainnet and their values at time of this study.
Parameter
Value
Pulse quorum size nPulse
12
Pulse threshold kP
7
Obligation validators nv
10
Obligation workers nw
Max(0.01 × |S.sns|, 50)
Obligation threshold kO
7
Pulse entropy lag pulseLag
21 blocks
Obligation vote lifetime voteLife
60 blocks
Cache delay reorgBuffer
11 blocks (Appendix C.3)
TABLE 1: Network Parameters ρ
Oxenρ(Si) models the core Oxen protocol as a lo-
cal state-transition function parameterised by the network
parameters ρ. Our model presents Oxen at the level of
successive chain states, while omitting lower-level im-
plementation details such as network communication and
low-level data format. Appendix C.1 discusses these ab-
stractions in more detail.
Given a service node’s pre-state Si : State, Oxenρ
returns the post-state Si+1 obtained after the next accepted
block is produced. The protocol proceeds as follows: First,
it yields a new valid block b through RunPulseρ(Si),
which abstracts the block production process involving
Pulse quorum (Sec. 3.4.1). Then, the protocol updates
the state using b: it appends b to the chain, removes
transactions in b from the mempool, updates the ser-
vice node list, derives and caches the Obligation quorum
(Sec. 3.4.2) for the new height, and runs the Obligation
quorum. Any state-change transactions produced by the
running Obligation quorum are validated then added to the
mempool. Next, we present the details of each quorum.
Algorithm 2: Oxenρ(Si)
Input: Current state Si
Output: Next state Si+1
Operation:
1
b ←RunPulseρ(Si)
▷Alg. 3
2
Si+1.B ←Si.B ∪{b}
3
Si+1.txs ←Si.txs \ b.txs
4
Si+1.sns ←UpdateSNS(Si.sns, b.txs)
▷App. C.2
5
Si+1.Q[b.height] ←GenOblρ(b, Si+1.sns)
▷Alg. 8
6
txsobl ←RunOblρ(Si+1)
▷Alg. 10
7
Si+1.txs ←Si+1.txs ∪{tx ∈txsobl :
ValidTx(tx, Si+1)}
▷Alg. 11
8
return Si+1
3.4.1. Pulse quorum. RunPulseρ(Si) models the proto-
col’s top-level behaviour for block production with Pulse
consensus, the protocol runs up to 255 rounds (an internal
counter for each height) to produce a valid block, then
falls back to PoW (Proof-of-Work) if no valid block is
produced. At each round, the protocol generates and runs
a Pulse quorum.
Quorum Generation. GenPulseρ(Si, r) and its
helper functions illustrates the Pulse quorum generation
process, which involves the following steps:
• sorts the active node list snsa by lastPulse to
favour nodes that have waited longer;
• GetPulseEntropyρ(Si.B, r) computes entropy values
using randomness from a fixed window of blocks
([bstart, . . . , bend]);
• GetSIρ(E, |snsa|) maps the resulting entropy vector
E to SI, a list of indices within [0, ⌊|snsa|
2
⌋);
• The indices SI are then applied directly to the sorted
active node list to finalise the pulse quorum selec-
tion via SN ←ApplySIρ(SI, snsa). The resulting

Sender (knows
snsa, (skid
s , pkid
s ),
(pkenc
r , pkid
r ))
Active Nodes snsa
Path: [h1, h2, h3, d]
Receiver’s Swarm: swarmr
Receiver
σ ←Signskids
 m∥pkid
s ∥pkenc
r

;
ce2e
r←−Enc(pkenc
r
, m∥pkid
s ∥σ)
1. E2E Encryption
swarmr ←GetSwarm(pkid
r )
2. Get Swarm
[h1, h2, h3]
r←−snsa;
d
r←−swarmr;
Constructs onion-encrypted ciphertext onion
3. Onion Construction
Sender →h1: onion
decrypt-then-relay: h1 →· · · →d: cd
d: decrypt cd then broadcast the decrypted message pe2e := pkid
r ∥ce2e;
4. Relay
swarmr ←getSwarm(pkid
r )
s
r←−swarmr
Receiver →s: pkid
r
s →Receiver: me2e
5. Retrieval
Figure 2: Session Send Message
Algorithm 3: RunPulseρ(Si)
Input: current state Si
Output: Pulse block b
Operation:
for r ←0 to 255 do
1
PQr ←GenPulseρ(Si, r)
▷Alg. 4
2
b ←RunPulseRoundρ(PQr, Si, r)
▷Sec. 4
3
UpdateLastPulse(Si.sns, PQr, i)
▷App. C.2
if b is a valid block then
4
return b
5
return b produced via PoW fallback
prefix of SN determines the new Pulse quorum:
element SN[0] is the block producer and nodes
SN[1 : nPulse −1] are validators.
Running Pulse quorum. Each Pulse round consists
of multiple stages. For simplicity, we abstract it into four
stages that are central to the vulnerabilities we uncovered:
1) Handshake. The network has finalised the nodes
participating in Pulse for producing the next block.
Algorithm 4: GenPulseρ(Si, r)
Context:
ρ: Network parameters
Input: Current state Si := {B, sns, txs, Q},
Round r
Output: PQ : PQ
Operation:
1
snsa ←[sn ∈Si.sns | sn.active]
2
snsa.Sort(key = lastPulse)
3
E ←GetPulseEntropyρ(Si.B, r)
▷Alg. 5
4
SI ←GetSIρ(E, |snsa|)
▷Alg. 6
5
SN ←ApplySIρ(SI, snsa)
▷Alg. 7
6
p ←SN[0].pk
7
V ←{SN[i].pk | 1 ≤i < ρ.nPulse}
8
PQ ←{p, V }
9
return PQ
Now the validators broadcast a handshake message
to other validators to indicate its activeness.
2) Bitset. Next, each validator produces a bitset Vi
to indicate which validators are active based on
the received handshake message (e.g., 00000000010
indicates that only the second validator is active).

Algorithm 5: GetPulseEntropyρ(B, r)
Input: B := [b0, . . . , bi], round r
Operation:
1
E ←[]
2
start ←i −ρ.pulseLag
3
end ←start + ρ.nPulse
for j ←start to end −1 do
if bj is a Pulse block then
4
ej ←Hash(r∥bj.pulseRand)
else
5
ej ←Hash(r∥bj.blockHash)
6
E.Append(ej)
7
return E
Algorithm 6: GetSIρ(E, n)
Operation:
1
SI ←[0]
2
ihalf ←⌊n
2 ⌋−1
for i ←1 to ρ.nPulse −1 do
3
imax ←Min(ihalf, n −i)
4
r
$(E[i])
←−−−−{0, . . . , imax −1}
5
iswap ←i + r
6
SI.Append(iswap)
7
return SI
Validators then broadcast this bitset and sign received
bitsets that they agree with. The quorum will agree
on the bitset with the most validators’ signatures V ∗
i .
All validators included in the final bitset V ∗
i
must
participate in subsequent Pulse stages, and validators
not included cannot participate in subsequent stages.
Once a valid V ∗
i
is finalised, the block producer
populates the block template with transactions in the
mempool, then broadcasts it to the validators.
3) Commit-Reveal. Upon receiving the block template,
each participating validator v ∈V ∗
i
generates a
random value rv, then broadcast the commitment
Hash(rv). Upon receiving commitments from all par-
ticipating validators. The quorum proceeds to broad-
cast the preimage rv. After receiving and verifying
all revealed randomness {rv}v∈V ∗
i . They are aggre-
gated to form the final pulseRandi in the block
header. This commit and reveal protocol means that
a single honest validator serves to ensure a random
pulseRandi, up to the bias introducible by aborts.
4) Sign. Validators verify that the revealed randomness
Algorithm 7: ApplySIρ(SI, SN)
Operation:
for i ←0 to ρ.nPulse −1 do
1
x ←SN[SI[i]]
2
SN[SI[i]] ←SN[i]
3
SN[i] ←x
4
return SN
matches the commit. Upon verification, each valida-
tor computes an aggregated pulseRandi, adds it to
the block header and signs the block. This commit
and reveal protocol ensures that the aggregated ran-
domness pulseRandi remains random as long as one
validator is honest.
Upon collecting ≥kP signatures on the final block,
it is broadcasted to the network.
3.4.2. Obligation quorum. Obligation quorums monitor
service node activity and propose state changes. Each
quorum has nv validators and nw workers. Validators test
workers (uptime proofs, storage reachability, participation
metrics), then propose state change (if any) for the node.
Each state change requires ≥kO validator votes.
Quorum Generation. Immediately after each new
block b is accepted, Oxen derives a new Obligation quo-
rum and caches it to the state. GenOblρ(b, sns) is called
to generate a new Obligation quorum from the block’s
blockHash and the current service node list sns. The
algorithm extracts the list of active nodes snsa and de-
commissioned nodes snsd, and sorts each list by public
key value. The lists are then shuffled and combined to
yield a new Obligation quorum.
Algorithm 8: GenOblρ(b, sns)
Output: OQ : OQ
Operation:
1
snsa ←[sn ∈Si.sns | sn.active]
2
snsd ←[sn ∈Si.sns | ¬sn.active]
3
snsa.Sort(key = pk)
4
SN ←Shuffleρ(b.blockHash, snsa, snsd)
5
V ←{SN[i].pk | 0 ≤i < ρ.nv}
6
W ←{SN[i].pk | ρ.nv ≤i < ρ.nv + ρ.nw}
7
OQ ←{V, W}
8
return OQ
Algorithm 9 describes the shuffling process, which
seeds a pseudorandom generator with the block hash then
applies a two-stage Fisher–Yates shuffle [44] to produce
a shuffle of the two lists.
Algorithm 9: Shuffle(r, snsa, snsd)
Context:
πr(L): permutes list L, seeded by r
Output: shuffled list
Operation:
1
Y ←|snsa|; Z ←Y + |snsd|; N ←ρ.nv
2
L0 ←[0, 

[…middle truncated for length…]

y must control an Obli-
gation quorum. Let the number of obligation validators
nv be 10, and the threshold kO be 7 (as on the mainnet),
and adversarial fraction p, the probability that the next
Obligation quorum is adversarial is approximated by:
P(W) = P10
k=7
 10
k

pk(1 −p)10−k. Assuming indepen-
dent trials across blocks, the probability of the adversary
winning within n blocks is 1 −(1 −P(W))n, which is
79.8% when p = 0.3, n = 150.
OV2: Biasing block randomness to control Obli-
gation quorum
Key Idea. An adversarially controlled Pulse quo-
rum can choose the block to control who is elected for
the next Obligation quorum.
Details. Let V ∗
i denote the participating-validator
bitset finalised in the Bitset stage, bi denote the block
template. As described in Section 3.4.1, only validators in-
cluded in final bitset V ∗
i can participate in the subsequent
Commit-Reveal, and Sign stages. For each participating
validator v, its random share rv is aggregated to form the
Pulse randomness value bi.pulseRand for the block, and
block hash bi.blockHash is derived from all header fields

of the block, including pulseRand. After bi is accepted,
Oxen derives the next Obligation quorum as
OQi+1 ←GenOblρ(bi, Si+1.sns),
which then applies a deterministic shuffle to the sns
seeded by bi.blockHash to produce the quorum.
This yields the vulnerability. Suppose the adversary
controls at least kP validators in the current Pulse quorum.
In the handshake stage, these validators can agree on
a bitset V ∗
i
that excludes all honest validators, thereby
preventing them from contributing random shares during
the Commit-Reveal stage. Once the block template is
fixed, every input to GenOblρ is public and deterministic
except the random shares. Since only attacker-controlled
validators can participate in the subsequent stages, the
attacker can try different values for {rv}v∈V ∗
i , compute
the resulting pulseRand and block hash, evaluate the
derived Obligation quorum OQi+1 offline, and stop when
OQi+1 contains at least kO attacker validators. The rest
of the Pulse stages can then proceed honestly.
OV2 is not an attack on the obligation quorum gen-
eration algorithm, but rather, an attack on the input block
hash. By controlling the bitset, a Pulse quorum with
≥kP attacker validators can control the pulse randomness
shares and hence the block hash, thereby biasing the next
generated Obligation quorum in its favour.
Practical exploitability. The exploitability of OV2
can be approximated similarly as for OV1. Given
nPulse = 12 (11 validators), kP = 7, and adversarial
fraction p, we have P(W) = P11
k=7
 11
k

pk(1 −p)11−k.
The probability of the adversary winning within n blocks
is 96.2% when p = 0.3, n = 150.
OV3: Obligation state-change transaction con-
straints not enforced
OV3 arises from the lack of temporal binding to an
Obligation quorum’s authority. At block height h, Oxen
intends to execute the cached quorum at height hObl =
h−ρ.reorgBuffer (Algorithm 10). Hence, an Obligation
quorum produced at height i is only expected to vote once
when the chain reaches height i + ρ.reorgBuffer. How-
ever, the validation logic for state-change transactions, as
shown in ValidTxρ(tx, S), is insufficient to enforce this
intended behaviour. It accepts a state-change transaction
as long as: the referenced quorum exists (L3), the voter
signatures and quorum membership are valid (L4-5), the
worker index is valid (L6), and the referenced quorum
height is within a generic vote-lifetime window (L7).
Crucially, it does not bind the authority of an Obliga-
tion quorum to its designated height, nor does it restrict
the multiplicity of transactions produced by a quorum.
This yields two vulnerabilities.
• OV3.1: Early voting and late voting. An Obli-
gation quorum generated at block i is intended to
send its state-change transactions only after a fixed
delay (reorgBuffer), i.e., beginning at block height
i + reorgBuffer. However, the current implemen-
tation accepts any transaction issued by the most
recently stored quorum, permitting an adversarial
quorum to vote immediately upon election, creating
an immediate effect on biasing the active node list,
Algorithm 11: ValidTxρ(tx, S)
Operation:
1
OQ ←S.Q[tx.height]
2
h ←|S.B|
3
if OQ = null then return ⊥
4
if |tx.votes| < ρ.kO then return ⊥
5
if ¬ValidateVotes(tx.votes, S)
▷App.
C.2
then return ⊥
6
pkw ←OQ.W[tx.iw]
7
snw ←{sn ∈S.sns | sn.pk = pkw}[0]
8
if snw = null then return ⊥
9
if ¬(h −ρ.voteLife ≤tx.height ≤h)
then return ⊥
10
if tx.sc is redundant then return ⊥
11
return ⊤
which increases the impact of OV1. Symmetrically,
state-change transactions from a stale quorum (e.g.,
at height i−reorgBuffer) may still be accepted by
the network at arbitrary later heights.
• OV3.2: Repeated voting. A quorum may submit
multiple distinct state-change transactions across dif-
ferent blocks. Since Oxen does not enforce a “one-
vote-per-quorum” invariant, an attacker-dominant
quorum can exert disproportionate influence by sub-
mitting repeated or contradictory votes.
OV4: Skipping decommission step
In Oxen, service node state change follows a staged
procedure, formalised by SelectStateChangeρ. An active
service node that passes all tests undergoes no state
change; a decommissioned node that passes all tests is
recommissioned; a service node that failed test(s), will
either be decommissioned and become temporarily inac-
tive, or be deregistered and permanently removed from the
state, depending on its remaining credit calculated based
on its past activity/contribution.
Algorithm 12: SelectStateChangeρ(w, pass, Si)
Operation:
1
find sn ∈Si.sns where w.pk = sn.pk
2
if passed then
3
if ¬sn.active then
return RECOM
4
return NOOP
else
5
credit ←Calculate credit based on past
activity of sn
6
if ¬sn.active then
7
if credit ≥0 then
return NOOP
8
return DEREG
else
9
return DECOM

Oxen checks the validity of a proposed state change
when validating the corresponding state-change transac-
tion, as described in ValidTxρ(tx, S). However, the exist-
ing check is too weak to enforce the intended procedure:
it effectively only checks that the proposed transition is
not redundant or impossible with respect to the node’s
current state. Crucially, Oxen does not enforce that each
deregistration transaction of a node is preceded by a
decommission transaction, or that a decommissioned node
must not be deregistered if it still has remaining credit.
Therefore, an adversarial Obligation quorum can pro-
pose to deregister any worker regardless of its current
state, and the resultant state-change will be accepted and
applied by the network. This drastically increases the
power of an adversarial Obligation quorum, as a deregis-
tered node is permanently removed from the network.
4.1. Impact
Referring back to the implied security properties in
Section 3.1, OV1 and OV2 undermine P4 (Quorum Se-
lection Fairness), which is a core requirement for a
PoS blockchain. By strategically decommissioning nodes
(OV1) or biasing block randomness (OV2), an attacker can
skew both Pulse and Obligation quorum formation. This
gives the adversary-controlled nodes a disproportionate
advantage in future elections. OV3 breaks P3 (Temporal
Quorum Authority), and OV4 breaks P5 (State Change
Integrity), further amplify the power of an adversary by
granting excessive power to the Obligation quorum.
As discussed in Section 2.1.2, Byzantine fault toler-
ant systems can tolerate at most one-third of adversar-
ial participants, equivalently, one-third adversarial stake
in PoS systems such as Oxen. In the next section, we
show via simulation that combining these vulnerabilities
can lead to practical network takeover without exceeding
this threshold; our simulations are somewhat conservative
because of the greedy approach they take to exploiting the
vulnerabilities, it is likely they underestimate the power of
a sophisticated adversary.
If an adversary had exploited these vulnerabilities for
network takeover, this would have caused the honest nodes
to be decommissioned. It seems a safe assumption that
the honest node maintainers would then have complained
and the attack would have been noticed. There are various
more subtle exploitations of these vulnerabilities which do
not result in network takeover but would advantage the
adversary in other ways; we have not carefully examined
the block history of Oxen for such attacks but it is clear
from our discussion with the developers that they do not
believe exploitation is occurring or has occurred.
5. Session Vulnerabilities
Because Session runs atop the same service node in-
frastructure as Oxen, consensus–layer vulnerabilities (Sec-
tion 4) can directly undermine Session’s anonymity. In
this section, we focus on weaknesses specific to Session’s
protocols, independent of Oxen. When we began our ex-
amination of Session, it was using version one of its group
chat protocol. It has since migrated to group protocol
version two and discontinued version one; this change
occurred in November 2024. We included in Appendix
B vulnerabilities which apply only to version one.
5.1. SV1. Service Node Discovery
As discussed, Session relies on a network of service
nodes to relay messages and host group data. To join the
network, a client first needs an entry point that provides
the current set of active service nodes. Session bootstraps
this process using a small set (currently three) of hard-
coded seed nodes. On first use, the client queries three
randomly chosen seeds, each of which returns its snapshot
of the active service node list. The client accepts the result
if the three snapshots are consistent. After bootstrapping,
the client refreshes its view by querying random service
nodes from the locally stored list. In theory, this approach
should harden the protocol against a corrupt single seed
node allowing the network to be spoofed to the client;
in reality, the implementation introduces additional single
points of failure rather than distributing trust.
A malicious seed node can supply an adversarial list,
making all future onion routes through attacker-controlled
nodes. While the client would query three random seed
nodes then compare the received list to check consistency,
Session only has a small pool of hardcoded seed nodes
(currently three), meaning that there is a 1/27 probability
of querying the same seed three times. Thus, control of
a single seed suffices to subvert a client’s view of the
network with fairly high probability.
5.1.1. Current Group Chat Protocol (version two).
Both version one issues (Appendix B) are addressed
in version two: all state changes (including add) are
admin–only, and member departure triggers an ad-
min–initiated rekey. We nevertheless observed a weak
binding of control messages: group actions are split into:
1) a configuration update that the admin publishes to
the swarm (encrypted under the group key) and that
clients periodically poll; and
2) a control message used for immediate UI feedback,
e.g., the control message for add (invite) is:
m =
 sender, t, inner

inner =
 op,
invitees
z
}|
{
⟨pk1, . . . , pkℓ⟩, . . . , σ

For control messages, the signature (σ) covers only
type (op) and timestamp (t) and omits the content (in-
vitees, in this example). Consequently, an adversary can
record and replay a valid admin-signed control message,
substitute the target while reusing the same signature and
timestamp. Honest members accept the forged message
and display it as a part of the group transcript, but the
impact is limited to a misleading UI notification (e.g.,
“x was invited to join the group”), as the authoritative
group state is derived from admin–published metadata
in the configuration plane. Figure 5 shows a setName
replay where the attacker substitutes a different name
under the same signature/timestamp (corresponding logs
in Appendix B.1.3).

blockchain
B0
r0
txs = []
...
B21
r21
txs = []
B22
r22
txs = []
quorums
. . .
obl22
state
Shuffpul
E = [e2, e3, e4]
2
5
4
3
validators
worker
obligation (H23)
obl18 = [s2, s4, s5, s3]
predicted sortedpul (H24):
[s10, s2, s3, s1, s6, . . . , s11]
pulH24: [s10, s3, s1],
SI : [0, 2, 3]
...
pulse (H23)
dereg(s3)
B23
r23
txs = [dereg(s3)]
produces
Figure 3: OV1: Obligation quorum biasing Pulse quorum at height 23
blockchain
B0
r0
txs = []
...
B22
r22
txs = []
B23
r23
txs = [dereg(s3)]
sns
sortedpul = [s10, s2, s1, s6, . . . , s11]
sortedobl = . . .
state
Shuffpul
Shuffobl
E = [e2, e3, e4]
sortedpul
sortedobl
1
6
10
validators
producer
pulse (H24)
pulH24 : [s10, s1, s6],SI : [0, 2, 3]
B24
r24
txs
produces
Hash(B24)
6
7
5
9
validators
worker
predicted obligation
obl24 = [s6, s5, s7, s9]
Figure 4: OV2: Pulse quorum biasing Obligation quorum at height 24
6. Network Takeover Attack on Oxen
Combining vulnerabilities discussed in the previ-
ous section, we present a practically-exploitable network
takeover attack that allows an adversary controlling ≤
30% of the stake to gain control over the entire network
within days. Then, we analyse its impact with simulations.
As mentioned in Section 3.4, the selection algorithm
of Pulse maps block entropy to an index in the active
node list, while state-change transactions produced by
an Obligation quorum can affect the construction of the
active node list. Therefore, an attacker-controlled Obli-
gation quorum can strategically decommission the test
nodes such that more attacker-controlled nodes will fall
into indices for a future Pulse quorum (OV1).
Additionally, each Obligation quorum is generated
from the hash of a single block, meaning that once
attackers control a Pulse quorum, producing a block
that generates an attacker-controlled Obligation quorum
is straightforward (OV2). The reorgBuffer mechanism
limits the immediate impact of OV2 by preventing a
freshly generated Obligation quorum from voting imme-
diately. However, the inadequate vote validation (OV3)
allows this to be bypassed.
6.1. Demonstrative Example
To illustrate the network takeover attack with a con-
crete example, we consider a simplified protocol model:
nPulse = 3: the Pulse quorum consists of two validators
and one block producer, requiring 2/2 validator sig-
natures. nv = 3, nw = 1: the Obligation quorum
consists of three validators and one worker, requiring
2/3 validator signatures and reorgBuffer = 5.
Bi each block contains a Pulse randomness value r and
a set of transactions txs.
Shuffpul(E, SN) combines
Algorithm
6
with
Algo-
rithm 7, consistent with the Pulse quorum selection
protocol described in Section 3.4.1.
Shuffobl(r, snsa) follows Algorithm 9, except that the de-
commissioned node list argument snsd is omitted, as
we assume no pending decommission transactions
and that an attacker-controlled Obligation quorum
exploits OV4 to directly deregister nodes, leaving
snsd empty throughout the example.
state We assume that the network is synchronous and
hence the state object is the same for all nodes. The
sns stores the active node list, sortpul returns the list
sorted by lastPulse and sortobl returns the list sorted

by public key value.
At block height 23 (Figure 3), the running Obligation
quorum is retrieved from cache as state.quorums[23 −
reorgBuffer] = obl18. This quorum is controlled by
adversarial validators s4 and s5, with an honest worker
s3. To exploit OV1 and bias the next Pulse quorum
at height 24, the adversarial validators predict the next
quorum formation using entropy values from blocks B2–
B4 and the predicted active node list snsactive, sorted by
lastPulse as it would appear at height 24 (which can be
done by updating the lastPulse field of the current Pulse
participants to 23, then re-sorting the list to simulate the
view at the next height). The attackers then call Shuffpul
to yield the predicted Pulse quorum s10, s3, s1 and swap
indices [0, 2, 3]. Although only s1 is adversarial in the pre-
dicted Pulse quorum, the attackers observe that removing
the current worker s3 (at index 2 of the sorted active node
list) would shift s1 and s6 to indices 2 and 3, respectively,
making the next Pulse quorum attacker-controlled. They
proceed to submit a deregistration transaction dereg(s3)
to the mempool, such that the current Pulse quorum can
include it to the new block B23 they are producing.
At height 24 (Figure 4) the deregistration has taken
effect and s3 is absent from snsactive. With the same
swap indices the actual Pulse becomes [s10, s1, s6], and
the attacker-controlled Pulse begins executing and exploits
OV2 to extend control: by varying the Pulse randomness
they influence the block hash and hence the Obligation
quorum derived from that block. Concretely, the adversary
repetitively calls Shuffobl(Hash(B24), sortobl) over differ-
ent values for B24 with different randomness r24 until
the derived Obligation quorum obl25 contains a winning
attacker majority (e.g., s6, s5).
While the running Obligation quorum at height 25
should be obl20 given the cache delay value, the attacker-
controlled quorum obl25 can exploit OV3 to immediately
start running. Repeating this process yields a chaining
effect in which biased Pulses and biased Obligations
reinforce one another.
6.2. Analysis
6.2.1. Oxen Simulation. We used python scripts to sim-
ulate the Oxen mainnet with the following parameters,
matching the corresponding parameters used by the main-
net (see Appendix C.3 for mainnet configuration):
• network size: n = 2000, similar to the state of
mainnet (≈1600 nodes)
• Pulse quorum: nPulse = 12, requiring 7/11 validator
signatures
• Obligation quorum: nv = 10, nw = 50, requiring
7/10 validator signatures
We simulate an attacker controlling p·n nodes. Oxen does
not state a formal global Byzantine threshold. However,
one of its design documents considers adversary fractions
0.25, 0.33, and 0.5. We therefore do not claim a precise
adversarial fraction that Oxen should tolerate. Instead, we
evaluate our attacks empirically across a range of adver-
sarial fractions, and treat 0.33 as a high-end benchmark.