Deploying decryption oracles for fun and non-profit: Backing up with friends and
TEEs
Kanav Gupta
University of Maryland
Gabriel Kaptchuk∗
University of Maryland
Ian Miers∗
University of Maryland
Abstract
Secure backups are the Achilles’ Heel of the E2EE ecosystem
if they do not provide the same strong security properties as
the E2EE messaging systems they support. They constitute a
set of servers that, if compromised, would expose nearly all
user messages. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art and deployed
secure backup systems fail to consider forward secrecy and
post-compromise security of these servers as first-order de-
sign constraints. Additionally, some proposals, in limited de-
ployment, implicitly rely on the PKIs of trusted execution
environments in order to provide security, creating a small
number of keys whose compromise would be catastrophic.
We develop an elegant, efficient, and simple secure backup
system that naturally addresses these issues by regularly ro-
tating backup servers, each of which samples independent
key material. To make this approach scalable, we design a
silent backup procedure, reducing server load compared to
state-of-the-art designs while providing improved security.
Our design can be trivially extended to incorporate social key
recovery, enabling more flexible deployment configurations.
We carefully prove the security of our construction and bench-
mark it to show that it is deployment-ready. Our approach
works on commodity hardware making it deployable without
the resources needed for WhatsApp or Apple’s Encrypted
Backups.
1
Introduction
Modern end-to-end encrypted (E2EE) messaging systems are
secure not just against eavesdroppers, but—to the maximum
extent possible—attackers compromising key material. State-
of-the-art systems, including Signal and WhatsApp, provide
three crucial guarantees: (1) forward secrecy, ensuring that
past, deleted messages remain secure even when an attacker
compromises a client’s device and keys; (2) post-compromise
security, ensuring that temporary compromise does not expose
future messages; and (3) no single point of compromise that
∗Joint senior authors. Order determined by a coin flip.
would effect all users—no master key whose compromise
would expose vast troves of communication.1
The strong security properties of encrypting messaging,
however, break down, when we consider the infrastructure
needed to provide backups, which have become an essential
feature for real-world deployment and are. These servers,
if compromised, would explore nearly all users’ messages,
making forward secrecy and post-compromise even more
important for the backup infrastructure than it is for individual
clients.
Deployed secure backup systems all share a single tem-
plate: users encrypt their key material under a joint function
of their password (or pin) and high-entropy key on the re-
covery server; typically, this involves the client deriving a
key from their pin via an Oblivious Pseudorandom Function
(OPRF) keyed by the server. In order to prevent dictionary
attacks, the recovery server stores the high-entropy key within
a secure compute environment (e.g., hardware security mod-
ules [15,16,40] or trusted execution environments [11]) that
limits the number of times this function can be evaluated. To
further strengthen the security properties of the system, the
trust in the secure compute environment can be distributed
in a threshold manner across multiple physical devices [12]
or secure compute providers [11], ensuring backups remain
secure even when an attacker compromises a subset of the
recovery infrastructure.
Given that these backup system store key material for E2EE
system, one might expect them to provide the same security
properties in the event the keys they hold are compromised.
Namely, forward secrecy would allow secure deletion of old
backups and post-compromise security would ensure that a
temporarily compromise of the server key material would
not allow decryption of all future backups. On the contrary,
however, achieving forward secrecy and post compromise
security for these secure backup systems is an understudied
problem and one given little practical consideration in system
1PKI mapping usernames to keys, of course, comes close, but key finger-
prints and key transparency make this difficult to exploit, especially at large
scale.
1

designs—despite the fact that backups are a more concen-
trated target than client devices. Even worse, many designs
introduce an oft-overlooked central point of failure: the PKI
infrastructure used to identify a TEE is rooted by a master
signing key held by the TEE manufacturer. We stress that
these are not hypothetical or theoretical problems—failing
to design robust secure backup systems immediately makes
them the Achilles’ Heel of the E2EE ecosystem.
Challenges of designing robust secure backup systems.
Consider a baseline solution in which there is a single HSM or
TEE storing the server’s key material. Making such a system
robust encounters the following challenges:
(1) Failover and verifying hardware authenticity: As in
any cloud service, encrypted backup serves must handle
failover by provisioning new servers. However, validat-
ing new TEE hardware relies on the hardware manufac-
turer’s or cloud operator’s trusted PKI, rooted in the a
small number of master signing keys. Were these signing
keys to be compromised, an attacker could impersonate
genuine HSMs/TEEs, and gain access to all key material.
This threat is not addressed in many proposals and, at
present, the only known solution is to massively over pro-
vision capacity at initial setup, which is cost prohibitive
for many organizations [15,16].
(2) Handling key rotation as we scale up: In order to provide
forward secrecy and post-compromise security, we must
periodically rotate the server’s key material. Because key
rotation necessarily invalidates existing client backups,
clients must generate a fresh backup. But, for the OPRF
approach widely used in many backup schemes, this re-
quires the client to interact with the service. Doubling
the frequency of backups effectively doubles the load
on the service, resulting in severe limits on the speed at
which key material can reasonably be rotated and there-
fore extending the window of exposure for an enclave.
This is in contrast to the fine grained forward secrecy and
post compromise security achieved by E2EE messaging
protocols.
(3) Scaling out infrastructure and trust diversity: Of course,
we cannot run our backup system with only a single
HSM/TEE for two reasons. First, like all services at
scale, an encrypted backup service needs to scale out
to run on many servers, since messaging services hun-
dreds of million to billions of daily active users. Sec-
ond, there is a vast literature demonstrating that HSMs’
and TEEs’ security guarantees are imperfect, especially
in the face of highly-resourced and persistent adver-
saries [10, 34, 36–39]. As such, we must build a large
cloud infrastructure and distribute our trust among a vari-
ety of hardware manufacturers and cloud providers. But,
operating at scale makes verifying hardware authenticity
and key rotation significantly more complex, expensive,
and risky.
As an additional design constraint, we require systems that
can be deployed for relatively low cost, allowing smaller and
non-profit E2EE platforms (e.g., Signal) to provide strong
security. This leads to the final design challenge:
(4) Guess limits on commodity trusted hardware: The se-
curity of a pin-based encrypted backup system depends
almost entirely on the systems ability to limit guess at-
tempts for the low entropy pin. Here, its critical that the
system is secure against rollback attacks that reset the
guest counter. One option is to use hardware security
modules with strong rollback preventions. Indeed this
is the approach taken by Apple and WhatsApp [15,40]
These, however, incur some substantial cost.
Another option is to use commodity Trusted Execution
Environments. However, widely available and concretely
affordable commodity TEEs, including SGX on server
chipsets, TDX, AMD SEV-SNP, and AWS Nitro (see [3]
for a detailed discussion), either do not provide protected
counters or provide them with far lower security. The
standard solution to resolve this is to operate a consen-
sus protocol over the TEEs, reducing the security of the
protocol to the security of the consensus protocol. This
is a security reduction, as semi-synchronous consensus
protocols are only robust against adversaries that corrupt
less than 1/3 of the nodes (essentially limiting client’s
abilities to pick their own trust diversity) and consen-
sus critically relies on carefully controlling the number
of adversarial nodes that can participate in consensus.
Alternatively, the system could leverage an external out-
source consensus to a proof-of-stake cryptocurrency like
Ethereum, but a high-resource attacker could simply fo-
cus on compromising the keys that hold enough stake (or
even temporarily buy a large amount of stake) to locally
fork the protocol. No matter the specific consensus ap-
proach taken, it will also drastically increases the trusted
compute base of the TEE, since it now needs to handle
consensus.2
Simultaneously solving all these problems efficiently is nec-
essary before secure backup systems can safely be deployed.
We emphasize that the choice of guess limiting mechanism
to solve (4) is completely orthogonal to the solutions used
to solve challenges (1), (2), and (3). Specifically, the design
space for (1), (2), and (3) assumes the existence of some guess
limiting approach, and a service provider can choose a so-
lution to (4) that fits the security and efficiency profile they
need. Looking ahead, we develop a protocol for (1), (2), and
(3) and then explore combining it with multiple guess limiting
approaches, ranging from the standard approach with HSMs
2For a detailed review of rollback prevention techniques in TEEs, please
refer to Section 8.
2

to an alternative using a proof of work blockchain. We stress
that the approach in this paper is not dependent on using a
blockchain for (4).
1.1
Our Contributions
In this work, we design an efficient, dynamically scalable
secure backup system that carefully takes deployment con-
straints into consideration. Our work leverages three obser-
vations: (1) if we can design a non-interactive backup pro-
cedure, clients can independently decide how to distribute
trust across a heterogeneous backup infrastructure; (2) let-
ting each TEE sample key material independently reduces the
need for enclaves to mutually authenticate. Additionally, with
a non-interactive backup procedure, the client doesn’t need
to interact with each TEE in order to use them as a backup
resource; and (3) we can provide forward secrecy and post-
compromise security naturally by allowing the set of active
backup servers evolve and churn over time. Again, a non-
interactive backup procedure makes this strategy possible, as
frequently refreshing backups does not incur any server load.
Our system has the following desirable properties:
– Extraordinarily simple design: Our system’s core design is
a careful composition of a set of well-studied cryptographic
primitives for which there are existing efficient, robust im-
plementations. We believe that this simplicity is a good
sign that our approach is the “right way” to think about this
problem.
– Improved security guarantees: We are able to significantly
improve the security guarantees offered compared to state-
of-the-art. Our construction provides natural forward se-
crecy and post-compromise security while actually decreas-
ing the interaction required between clients and servers.
Additionally, we provide some security in the event of
catastrophic compromises: if the TEE PKI is compromised,
the attacker doesn’t get access to the key material stored in
existing TEEs, even if trust in them is rooted in the compro-
mised PKI. Using a compromised PKI to access messages
requires announcing new (inauthentic) TEEs and waiting
for clients to migrate their backups—a potentially slow and
detectable process.
– Configurable trust diversity and social key recovery: Our
system is highly configurable, allowing clients to ad-hoc
customize their backup configurations, e.g., distribute trust
across different TEEs, regions, cloud provider, and archi-
tectures or choose their preferred balance between security
and availability. In fact, our system architecture naturally
allows interoperability with social key recovery, in which
some amount of trust is placed in a users personal contact,
rather than exclusively rooting trust in cloud platforms.
This is possible because interaction is only required during
recovery and TEEs need not be mutually aware.
– Rigorous proof of security: We provide a simulation-based
security definition for our system and rigorously prove that
our protocol realizes this definition.
2
Technical Overview
Our work considers a client holding a secret m.3 Our construc-
tion is agnostic to the specific utility of m, but we encourage
the reader to imagine m is a key encryption key which en-
crypts some data encryption key material used to encrypt a
users’ message history. The client wants to back up m un-
der a low-entropy password4 pwd in the presence of mul-
tiple recovery servers S1,S2,...,Sn, each running a TEE.5
These TEEs might be of different types (i.e., TDX, SGX, or
Nitro), in different cloud environments (i.e., Azure, Google
Cloud, or AWS), or in different jurisdictions. Importantly, we
assume that each of these servers samples their key mate-
rial completely independently and publishes their public key,
along with an attestation that they are running the correct
software, publicly. The client’s software starts by building an
access policy A over these servers (e.g., 7 of 10 TDX nodes
on Azure, 5 of 9 AMD SEV-SNP nodes on GCP, and 8 of
11 Nitro nodes on AWS) and then generating secret shares
m1,m2,...,mn ←ShareA(m) such that m can only be recon-
structed using shares that satisfy A. For simplicity, one can
think of A as a threshold access structure and the secret shar-
ing scheme as Shamir secret shares [35], but other access
structures (like threshold of thresholds) are also supported.
In existing approaches [11,40], the client would then spec-
ify the password pwd and interact with the TEE within each
server Si to encrypt mi as
si = mi +OPRFki(pwd),
where OPRF is an oblivious pseudorandom function keyed
with a high-entropy server key ki stored in the TEE. Our
work takes a slightly different approach: the client samples an
OPRF key ki locally for each server Si and then locally evalu-
ates the OPRF and computes si as before. Additionally, the
client then encrypts the key pair under Si’s public encryption
key pki as
cti ←Encryptpki(ki).
The client’s backup then
constitutes a set of pairs
(ct1,s1),(ct2,s2),... all of which can be stored in arbitrary
cloud storage (e.g., storage provided by the E2EE service
provider or Google Drive). To recover m, the client can down-
load the (cti,si) tuples, send cti to Si’s TEE, and then query
using the oblivious evaluation protocol on pwd, unmasking
3To reduce ambiguity, we refer to the client’s data as a message, even
though it will often, in practice, be cryptographic key material.
4Throughout the rest of this work, we refer to the client’s low-entropy
secret as a password, although in practice it may also be a pin.
5For convenience, we use the term server and TEE interchangeably, as
the “important” part of the servers we consider are their TEEs.
3

the share mi. Finally, once enough mi have been recovered,
the client can reconstruct m.
Notice that this backup procedure is fully silent, in that
there is no interaction between the client and Si. While this
will improve the efficiency of the backup system, this alone is
not sufficient to provide improved security.
Improving security via key rotation. Rather than thinking
of the set of servers S1,S2,...,Sn as static, we accept that the
set will change, allowing for hardware failures, reboots, cloud
migration, or dynamic scaling. Whenever a server is removed
from the active set—even if it is just for a temporary reboot—
the key material (pki,ski) it stores will be permanently deleted
and each new—or rebooted—server will sample a fresh key
pair. Rather than seeing this as a “bug,” we leverage this
churn into a free source of gradual key rotation. Namely, we
can require all servers to reboot regularly, even if it is not
necessary for logistical reasons, in order to provide stronger
security guarantees.
When a client wants to back up their message m, they use
(a subset of) the currently active servers and run the backup
procedure outlined above. Eventually, a sufficiently large num-
ber of their chosen servers may go offline—securely delet-
ing the TEE encryption keys in the process—such that it
would be impossible to reconstruct m, even with access to
the correct pwd. At the same time, a set of new servers with
fresh key material will come online. This churn means the
client must refresh their backup of m, generating a new set
of pairs (ct1,s1),(ct2,s2),... with respect to the new active
set of servers. Alternatively, the client could sample a new m′
to replace m entirely and back m′ up instead.6 Importantly,
the client should not wait until their old backups are non-
recoverable, but instead should regularly be refreshing their
backups such that they have the necessary redundancy. Im-
portantly, clients can’t simply just “migrate” a masked share
mi to another server, or they cannot possibly achieve forward
secrecy. Instead, the client should generate a fresh secret shar-
ing of m each time they renew, allowing their old backups to
completely expire.
Notice that this approach immediately provides forward se-
crecy and post-compromise security. We get forward secrecy
because old backups eventually become fully non-recoverable,
even if all key information in the system is later compromised.
Similarly, we get post-compromise security because each new
server samples their encryption key independently, allowing
the security of the system to “heal” over time.
Moreover, we observe that the TEE PKI is no longer a
single point of failure in our system, despite the fact that we
make use of cheap cloud TEEs. If an adversary were to com-
promise the TEE PKI, they could convincingly impersonate
6When m is a key encryption key, this would require re-encrypting just
the data encryption key rather than the full backup (e.g., message history).
Looking ahead, the data encryption key material may also change over time
to facilitate secure deletion of messages in the backup history or providing
post-compromise security.
authentic TEEs and advertise valid-looking encryption pub-
lic keys for backup, but there is no synchronization between
TEEs—even those that are backed by the same TEE PKI.
Over time, some clients may migrate their backups (at least
partially) to these malicious servers. Importantly, however,
this process would likely be somewhat slow, as it relies on
client-driven actions. Moreover, the malicious servers would
need to announce themselves publicly in order to successfully
exfiltrate user messages; this provides an opportunity for the
service provider to identify a failure at halt the system’s oper-
ation. Given the risk of TEE PKI compromise, it may make
sense for clients to slowly ramp up their trust in newer TEEs,
either by designing an access policy A that puts little trust
in them or by migrating shares with probability proportional
to their uptime. Paranoid clients or applications using the
backup service, can effectively be configured in a fail-safe
model, where excessive churn in TEEs, e.g., by an adversary
spinning up many sybil servers, would not be selected, simply
halting future backups while previous ones slowly expire.
We note that our approach is only feasible because we have
a non-interactive backup process. If client-server interaction
were required in order to refresh backups, the TEEs would
become saturated by the hundreds of millions of users who
would need to perform such an action. Instead, interactions
between clients and server are only necessary during recovery,
which should be relatively less frequent and independent of
how aggressive clients are in achieving fine grained forward
secrecy and post compromise security for backups.
Synchronizing query counts. So far, we have implicitly
assumed that there was some mechanism to rate-limit the
queries sent to each server. Because the cloud-provisioned
TEEs we use have no non-malleable state, we must leverage
a mechanism outside of the TEE to enforce limits. Existing
work’s decision to rely on consensus among the TEEs [11]
makes the TEE PKI a vulnerability again, as an attacker might
be able to subvert the consensus process if they controlled
enough TEEs, allowing them to launch efficient online dictio-
nary attacks, which may be enough to quickly brute-force the
low entropy pins used in some configurations.
In our work, we turn to existing consensus networks as an
alternative tool to root consensus, conceptually building on
the approach of Kaptchuk, Green and Miers [23]. Specifically,
we propose that the recovery servers rely on the extraordi-
narily high cost of forking a proof-of-work blockchain (e.g.,
Bitcoin [33] or Zcash [5, 31]) to prevent an attacker from
circumventing the rate limiting process.7 The most naive way
to do this is have clients generate a chain of transactions, in
which each transaction embeds a specific password attempt.
Because transactions can only be spent once, this allows TEEs
7It is important that the blockchain use proof-of-work rather than proof-
of-stake, as we want to avoid the existence of key material that could be stolen
in order to allow brute-force attacks. Moreover, highly-resourced attackers
could also stake a large amount of money temporarily in order to launch such
an attack before withdrawing their fund, making this attack very inexpensive.
4

to robustly count the number of previous password attempts
corresponding to a particular backup and limit the number of
query to which they will respond (e.g., ten).
An important, and often overlooked, part of guess counting
is preventing the attacker from copying a existing backup
directly into a new backup with a fresh guess counter, thereby
bypassing the guess limit. In our work, we do this by
assigning each backup with a randomly sampled backup
identifier BID. Each ciphertext then embeds BID as cti ←
Encryptpki(ki,BID,lim). When logging a new guess attempt,
it is associated with the identifier BID and the enclave verifies
that this BID matches the one in the ciphertext. Critically,
this approach requires a non-malleable public key encryption
scheme, such that an attacker cannot blindly modify the BID
stored in a ciphertext.
Alterative approach for synchronizing query counts
and design trade offs. Our proposed approach for query
synchronization—using a proof-of-work blockchain— incurs
delays: transactions must be confirmed before a client can
complete their recovery, requiring 10 to 60 minutes for Bit-
coin and 2 minutes to 15 minutes for Zcash, depending on
number of confirmations required. While these delays are not
insignificant, we note that recovery should be a relatively rare
event for any given user and rarely is instantaneous recovery
necessary—especially if it comes at the cost of reduced se-
curity. Finally, we note that specific consensus mechanism
is completely orthogonal to the rest of our design; design-
ers could use consensus between the TEEs or some small
number of HSM counters, choosing to sacrifice some security
for reduced latency, or combine all approaches for defense in
depth.
2.1
Extensions
Social key recovery. While all existing, deployed secure
backup systems only use service-provider provisioned re-
sources as recovery servers, a popular idea in the literature
is social key recovery, in which clients put some trust into
their contacts instead [9, 25, 28, 32]. While promising, this
approach has proved difficult to operationalize.
Having a non-interactive backup procedure, however,
makes social key recovery trivial: clients can simply encrypt
some of the shares ki to their contacts. When the user’s con-
tact’s devices have secure elements, the construction can re-
main exactly the same, although it may be prudent to require
a users’ contacts to manually approve guess attempts or re-
strict guesses to be face-to-face (i.e., over NFC). When these
devices have no secure element, there is no way to prevent a
client from locally running a dictionary attack to attempt to
recover mi. To mitigate the risk of such an attack, we simply
pick a secret sharing scheme with shares that are computation-
ally close to uniform when below the reconstruction threshold
(e.g., Shamir secret shares), which prevents an attacker from
checking if their password attempts are correct.
On-demand forward security via. puncturable public
key encryption. The above design expires existing backups
slowly, as a user must either wait for enough servers to churn
or must exceed their maximum number of guesses. Letting
clients request that a TEE delete their key material would
immediately expire their existing backup, this the TEE’s key
material is reused across all clients, making this approach a
dead-end.
If deployments want to enable proactive deletion, they can
replace the public key encryption scheme in the above sketch
with a puncturable public key encryption scheme [17]. In this
scheme, the TEEs can locally modify their secret key material
such that they can no longer decrypt specific ciphertexts, e.g.,
either from specific users or encrypted under some known
tag. Using such a scheme would allow clients to request re-
cover servers to puncture out their existing backups without
impacting the recoverability of other clients. We note that
this approach needs to be treated carefully, as many TEEs are
vulnerable to rollback attacks, which would potentially allow
an adversary to “un-puncture” a secret key.
Efficiently deleting backed up files. Until this point, we have
largely elided how m should would be used within an end-to-
end application. Recall that m could be a key encryption key
which is used in a KEM/DEM paradigm (i.e., encrypting a
data encryption key material, which is actually responsible for
encrypting the user’s message history). By providing forward
secrecy to m, the data encryption key can also be rotated,
thereby securely deleting old versions of backups. In principle,
this makes it possible to delete specific messages with a users’
message backups. A naive approach to this would require
the user to sample a new data encryption key d, re-encrypt
their entire message history besides the message that will
be deleted under d, and then sample a fresh m′ to encrypt
d. Finally, m′ can be backed up. Recently Dodis, Jost, and
Marcedone describe Compact Key Storage [13,14], an elegant
technique for reducing this linear overhead to logarithmic
while keeping |d| logarithmic in the message history . Their
approach can be directly integrated with our own to facilitate
efficient deletion of files.
2.2
Threat Model
In our work we assume a powerful state-sponsored attacker
who is interested in (1) mass-compromise of many users
backups in order to conduct mass surveillance, and (2) the
targeted compromise of high-value targets’ backups.8 We
begin with the new threats we consider in this work:
– Compromise TEE PKI: All modern TEEs embed some at-
testation or measurement protocol, which allows clients to
8Of course, individuals who are very high-value, e.g., leaders of opposi-
tion movements or diplomats, should likely not be using backups at all, as
they are a usability feature that incurs security risk; this approach has been
embraced by Apple’s Lockdown Mode, which trades worse functionality for
much stronger security guarantees.
5

verify that (1) the endpoint with which they are interact-
ing is an authentic TEE, and (2) the software the TEE is
running matches some pre-determined hash. The security
of this mechanism is rooted in key material held by the
TEE manufacturer. In a significant departure from prior
work, we assume that the adversary can compromise this
high-value key material.
– Slowly compromise TEEs: Clearly there can be no mean-
ingful security if the adversary can arbitrarily compromise
all TEEs in the system, as dictionary attacks will imme-
diately be possible. Instead, we aim for the next, weakest
security assumption: we assume that the adversary can
slowly compromise TEEs and TEE types, such that over
a long time all TEEs will eventually be compromised, but
not at the same time.
Additionally, the adversaries we consider can perform the
following, standard actions:
– Compromise service provider: We assume the service pro-
vide itself can be compromised, either because they are
legally compelling to take some particular action, an inter-
nal malicious actor, or a system breach. As a result, any key
material held by the service provide that is not stored in a
TEE can be accessed by the adversary and all server-side
data can be arbitrary modified.
– Compromise cloud provider: The adversary can direct the
cloud hosts on which TEEs are executed to act arbitrarily.
In addition to being able to read or modify all messages
exchanged between clients and TEEs, the adversary can
launch rollback attacks (either using software snapshots or
potentially even physical access to the device), in which
the attacker attempts to revert the state of the TEE to some
previous, authentic state.
– Act as a malicious client: The adversary may also act as a
malicious client interacting with the system, potentially re-
using or modifying messages sent by other, honest clients.
– Post to public ledger: Our solution relies upon the unfor-
gability of a public ledger as a synchronization primitive.
Thus, we consider adversaries that cannot forge proofs of
inclusion on a known public ledger (e.g., locally gener-
ate forks of the Bitcoin blockchain). The adversary may,
however, post arbitrary messages onto the ledger.
We enumerate our desired security properties, both infor-
mally and formally, in Section 4.
3
Preliminaries
Notation For integers a ≤b, we use [a,b] to denote the set
{a,...,b}. For integer n, [n] denotes [1,n]. For a set S, we use
P(S) to denote its power set. For a deterministic algorithm A,
we use y = A(x) to denote running A on input x to get y. In
case of randomized algorithm, we use ‘←’ instead of ‘=’.
Secret Sharing. Our construction depends on a (generaliza-
tion of) threshold secret sharing scheme, where the distribu-
tion of any subset of shares below threshold are uniform.
Definition 1. For an integer n and a monotonic access struc-
ture A : P([n]) →{0,1}, a (A,n) secret sharing scheme is
a set of algorithms (Share,Reconstruct) with the following
syntax:
1. Share : I →Sn, a randomized algorithm that splits a
message (from domain I) into n shares (in domain S)
2. Reconstruct : S≤n →I ∩⊥, a reconstructing algorithm
that combines shares output by Share.
We require our secret sharing scheme to satisfy the following
two properties:
1. Correctness: For all x ∈I, if (x1,x2,...xn) ←Share(x),
then
for all sets P ⊆[n] such that A(P) = 1,
Reconstruct({xi}i∈S) = x.
2. Uniformity: For all x ∈I, if (x1,x2,...xn) ←Share(x),
then for all sets P ⊆[n] such that A(P) = 0, {xi}i∈P is
computationally indistinguishable from uniform distri-
bution over S|P|
Public Key Encryption. We revisit the definition of CCA-
secure public key encryption:
Definition 2 (CCA Public Key Encryption). A CCA
Public Key Encryption scheme is a set of algorithms
(KeyGen,Encrypt,Decrypt) that satisfies two properties:
1. Correctness: For all messages m, and (sk,pk) ←
KeyGen(1λ), Decrypt(sk,Encrypt(pk,m)) = m.
2. CCA-Security: The advantage of all adversaries A in
the following game with challenger C is negligible:
(a) C runs (sk,pk) ←KeyGen(1λ) and sends pk to A
(b) A picks two messages m0,m1 of same length and
sends it to the challenger.
(c) C
picks a random
bit b and sends c ←
Encrypt(pk,mb) to A.
(d) A can request polynomial number of decryption
queries from the challenger, as long as the query
is not c.
(e) A outputs b′ and wins if b = b′.
2HashDH OPRF. Jarecki et al [20] provide a construction
for a minimally interactive UC-secure oblivious PRF (OPRF).
Informally, an OPRF allows a client, with input x, to oblivi-
ously learn F(k,x) for a target PRF F, where the PRF key k
is held by a server. For a formal definition, we refer the reader
to [20].
6

FaoKVS
Setup: Initializes an empty public list of lists L.
On input (MakePost,BID,post) from P:
1. Append post to the end of L[BID] (create a list if it
doesn’t exist).
2. Send (MakePost,BID,post) to S (if P ̸= S)
On input (GetPost,BID) from P:
1. Set T ←L[BID].
2. Set ℓ←|T| and post = T[ℓ−1]
3. Send back (post,ℓ) to P.
Figure 1: Append-only Key Value Store Functionality,
FaoKVS.
Jarecki et al’s 2HashDH construction computes a target
PRF F(k,x) = H2(x,H1(x)k), where H1 and H2 are random or-
acles. H1 : {0,1}∗→G converts a low entropy x into a group
element, and H2 : {0,1}∗×G →D converts x and group ele-
ment G into the target output domain D. In our construction,
D is going to be the share space of the corresponding secret
sharing scheme.
To compute this PRF obliviously, the client first sends u =
H1(x)r for a random scalar r, to the server. The server, sends
back v = uk = H1(x)rk to the client. The client unblinds v and
hashes the output along with x to get the desired output; that
is, it computes H2(x,v1/r) = H2(x,H1(x)k).
Append-only Key Value Store. Our construction makes use
of an append-only key value store functionality FaoKVS, as de-
scribed in Figure 1. The functionality is reminiscent of a trans-
parency log; however, we additionally require the function-
ality to return the number of values under the requested key.
There are many ways in which such a functionality could be
instantiated; most key-transparency systems [8,18,26,27,30]
could be trivially reconfigured to serve as such a system. In
our implementation, we take a more direct approach (build-
ing on the ideas in [23]) by simply committing to a plaintext
dictionary and embedding this commitment into a chain of
Bitcoin transactions. See Section 6 for details.
4
Definition: Password-Protected Distributed
Key Backup and Recovery
In this section, we give both informal and formal security
notions for our system. We note that the existing literature on
secure backups tends to rely on informally security arguments,
which can lead to missing subtleties. Thus, we choose to
provide both.
4.1
Informal Security Goals
We begin by enumerating a set of informal security goals:
(1) Client configurable trust: Clients should have control
over their own risk tolerance by arbitrarily configuring a
threshold access policy for their backups among the set
of online servers.9 As long as the set of compromised
TEEs does not satisfy that access policy, then the adver-
sary can make no more than some public known limit
lim number of password guesses. Beyond these guesses,
the adversary can learn nothing about the contents of the
backup.
(2) Forward secrecy: A backup system should allow clients
to delete subsets of their data. As such, old backups
must either naturally expire or expire in response to user
requests. This should hold against an adversary which
compromises all key material in the system after expiry.
(3) Post-compromise Security: In the event that the adver-
sary does successfully compromise enough servers to ac-
cess a clients’ backups, we require that the system auto-
matically “heal.” Specifically, messages that are backed
up after the adversary is no longer corrupting the system
cannot be decrypted using the key material the adversary
has already accessed.
(4) Existing backups remain confidential under TEE PKI
compromise: In the event that the attestation keys for
the TEEs are compromised, we require that the confi-
dentiality of existing backups are not compromised. It is
clear that this compromise will eventually result in the
system failure, but this failure should be slow and highly
noticeable, such that administrators can halt the system’s
use.
(5) Security against slow-moving adversaries:
Confiden-
tiality of a client’s backup should be preserved against a
slow-moving adversary that eventually could corrupt all
the recovery servers. Such an adversary may not be able
to simultaneously corrupt all the servers, but could, e.g.,
over years, gather all long-term servers’ key material.
(6) Security under password reuse: Clients will inevitably
reuse passwords over time. As such, we require that the
recovery procedure does not reveal anything about the
password.
9Our system is technically slightly more flexible: any access policy is
possible, providing there exists a secret sharing scheme for that access policy
such that any set of shares that do not satisfy the policy appear pseudorandom.
This is trivially satisfied by Shamir secret sharing [35] as well as the threshold-
of-thresholds generalization.
7

FKeyBackup
Setup: Initiate Active,Corr,Unregistered,Backups and RecoveryAttempts as empty lists.
Server Management: We assume Sim is aware of all interactions in this section.
On input (Register,S,t) from S (or Sim if S is corrupt):
1. If S is already in Active or Unregistered, abort.
2. Append S to Active
3. If S is corrupt, append S to Corr.
4. After time t has passed and S ̸∈Corr at that point in time, invoke (Unregister,S).
On input (Corrupt,S) from Sim:
1. If S is already in Corr, abort.
2. Append S to Corr.
On input (Unregister,S) from S (or Sim if S is corrupt):
1. Remove S from Active and append S to Unregistered
Backup Phase
On input (Backup,BID,S,A,pwd,lim,m) from C (or Sim if C is corrupt):
1. If C is not corrupt, sample a unique BID and use it instead.
//Honest clients use high-entropy BID
2. If C is corrupt and there already exists a record associated with BID in Backups, sample a unique corrupt identifier backup ID
CBID and record (CBID,BID,S,A,pwd,m,lim) to Backups. Otherwise, record (⊥,BID,S,A,pwd,m,lim) to Backups.
3. Send (Backup,BID,CBID,S,A,lim) to Sim.
4. Set ctr[BID] = 0
5. Send (CBID,BID) to C.
Recovery Phase
On input (InitRecovery,CBID,BID,pwd′) from C (or Sim if C is corrupt):
//Honest clients set CBID = ⊥
1. Retrieve record (CBID,BID,S,A,pwd,m,lim) from Backups, and abort if it doesn’t exist.
2. Set attempt = ctr[BID]
3. Record (CBID,BID,attempt,S,A,pwd,pwd′,m,C,lim) to RecoveryAttempts
4. Send (RecoveryStart,CBID,BID,attempt) to Sim and all S ∈S.
5. Update ctr[BID] = ctr[BID]+1
On input (AllowRecovery,S,CBID,BID,attempt) from S (or Sim if S is corrupted):
1. Fetch record (CBID,BID,attempt,S,A,pwd,pwd′,m,C,lim) from RecoveryAttempts, and abort if it doesn’t exist

[…middle truncated for length…]

ex. This is important, as a
client, who has lost all key material, has no way to authenticate
with the service provider.
When a server Si, with trusted compute capabilities, joins,
it generates a public key encryption key pair (ski,pki) and
announces the public key along with a maximum uptime t and
an attestation document. Once the time is up, the server tears
itself down, securely deleting the secret key. The attestation
document makes sure that the public key was generated by
a TEE running a predetermined binary (or VM). This binary
can be published publicly for audit. We discuss the properties
of our binary in Section 6.
Backup Phase. During the backup phase, the client begins
with secret sharing its backup encryption key m into secret
shares {m1,m2,...mn} for each server {S1,S2,...Sn}. Our
construction supports any secret sharing scheme, as long as
the desired access structure can be efficiently realized. The
servers can be picked arbitrarily, based on users preference; if
the user prefers to not keep updating the backup, it can pick
servers with a larger uptime.
Then, corresponding to each server, it uniformly samples a
PRF key ki for the 2HashDH PRF, and masks the correspond-
ing share with the PRF output on its password pwd; that is,
si = H2(pwd,H1(pwd)ki)+mi. It then encrypts the PRF key
ki, along with backup ID BID and attempt limit lim, under the
server Si’s announced public key to get cti. While BID and
lim can themselves be public, including them in the ciphertext
is important, to make sure they are not tampered with by SP.
After repeating the process for all servers, C sends all si’s
and cti’s to SP’s blob storage, to be stored at location BID.
Alternatively, a client can store it in a personal storage service,
like Google Drive, that can be readily accessible in case their
device is lost. This concludes the backup phase.
Recovery Phase. To recover their secret with a candidate pass-
word pwd′, the client samples a random field element r and
computes com = H1(pwd′)r, and records this value on FaoKVS
at BID. Then, it contacts all servers in it’s original access
structure, sends server Si the backup ID BID and ciphertext
cti from the original backup structure. The server Si fetches
(com,ℓ) from FaoKVS, decrypts cti, checks if the BIDs (the
one that is sent vs the one in cti) match and ℓ≤lim, and returns
back ti = comki = H1(pwd′)r·ki. Client unblinds ti to calculate
H1(pwd′)ki, calculates the PRF value H2(pwd′,H1(pwd′)ki)
and unblinds si to get the secret share mi. It reconstructs mis
to get back the secret m. In case the password is correct, i.e.
pwd′ = pwd, this results in the correct secret m.
Batching. Our protocol also supports coordinated batching
from SP. That is, instead of clients directly contacting the
servers, the clients can proxy the recovery requests through
SP. This allows SP to additionally learn comki, however, this
is fine, in terms of security, due to DH-assumption. This coor-
dination allows SP to efficiently batch requests from multiple
client, and avoid client-to-server round trips from each client.
Now, SP could make 1 request to each server, for say 1000
client requests, avoiding expensive round trips.
We provide the simulator and indistinguishability proof of
the following theorem in Section 9:
Theorem 1. Protocol ΠKeyBackup securely realizes FKeyBackup
in FaoKVS-hybrid, random oracle and algebraic generic
model.
5.1
Adding Social Key Recovery and Proactive
Deletion
Adding our extensions into our protocol is direct. First, if
we want to model social key recovery, we simply require a
mechanism by which the public keys of a users’ contacts can
be advertised. If we aim to backup the key material for E2EE
systems, this is trivial, as contacts already should be exchang-
ing public key material (and verifying safety numbers). Thus,
the protocol can remain exactly the same. Depending on the
10

ΠKeyBackup
Maintenance and Setup
1. On setup, SP initiates an empty, publicly-accessible blob-store mapping backup IDs to backup structures.
2. When a server Si joins, it samples a fresh PKE pair (ski,pki), picks a maximum uptime t, and broadcasts (pki,t).
3. Si tears itself down, securely deleting ski, after t time has passed since provisioning.
Backup Phase
Inputs: Client C starts with a backup key m, a password pwd and an attempt limit lim
1. C generates (A,n)-secret shares of m to get {m1,m2,...mn}.
2. C picks a BID such that chain with BID doesn’t exist on FaoKVS
3. C selects n online servers S1,S2,...Sn.
4. for i in [n]:
(a) C picks a random ki ←Fp and calculate si = H2(pwd,H1(pwd)ki)+mi
(b) C encrypts (ki,BID,lim) under Si’s public key pki to get cti.
5. C sends (BID,s1,s2,...,sn,ct1,ct2,...ctn) to SP or personal storage.
6. SP stores (s1,s2,...,sn,ct1,ct2,...ctn) at index BID in the blob-store (and aborts if entry at BID already exists).
Recovery Phase
Inputs: Client C starts with a password attempt pwd′ and BID
1. C fetches (s1,s2,...,sn,ct1,ct2,...ctn) from SP’s blob-storage at index BID.
2. C samples r uniformly from Fp, computes com = H1(pwd′)r, and sends (BID,com) to SP
3. SP sends (MakePost,BID,com) to FaoKVS.
4. for i in [n]:
(a) C sends (BID,cti) to Si.
(b) Si sends (GetPost,BID) to FaoKVS to get back (com,ℓ)
(c) Si decrypts cti, using ski, into (ki,BID′,lim), and aborts if decryption fails.
(d) Si checks if ℓ≤lim and BID = BID′, and aborts otherwise
(e) Si sends back ti = comki to C.
(f) C receives ti and calculates mi = si −H2(pwd′,t1/r
i
).
5. C checks if the set of servers R that did not abort satisfies A(R ) = 1, and abort otherwise.
6. C reconstructs m from received shares and aborts if reconstruction fails.
Figure 3: Password-protected Key Backup Protocol, ΠKeyBackup.
11

limitation on a users’ contact’s devices, it may be more appro-
priate to remove formal guess limiting for these shares and
instead enforce guess limits by (1) only allowing recovery
queries to happen over NFC, so that face-to-face verification
can happen, and (2) requiring the users’ contact to manually
approve each query through the devices user interface. Imple-
menting these features does not require and changes to the
protocol itself.
Similarly, allowing clients to proactively delete their exist-
ing keys simply requires replacing the existing CCA-secure
public key encryption with a puncturable, CCA-secure public
key encryption scheme [17]. Otherwise, the entire protocol
remains the same.
6
Implementation
We implement a PoC of our scheme in Rust in 4400 lines of
code. We use ECIES encryption scheme, from ecies Rust
package, for CCA-secure public key encryption. This is essen-
tially hash Elgamal, using secp256k1 as the Elliptic Curve
and AES-256-GCM as the symmetric cipher. We use SHA256
to realize our random oracles.
Realizing FaoKVS. Again, we emphasize that the choice os
implementation for FaoKVS is orthogonal to the rest of the
system design. We first describe the choices we make within
our implementation before discussing alternatives.
Our implementation realizes FaoKVS using Bitcoin. Specif-
ically, during initialization, the service provider generates a
new bitcoin wallet and adds some Bitcoin to it, to cover for fu-
ture transaction fees. It maintains an invariant, about its wallet,
that it always have one available UTXO. Whenever it needs
to make a transaction with some associated data (more on
the contents later), it spends the previous UTXO, to generate
two outpoints: (1) an OP_RETURN script with the associated
data, and (2) all available bitcoin (minus the fees) sent back
to the wallet’s address. The second outpoint becomes the new
unique UTXO. Since the wallet’s private key is only avail-
able with the service provider, nobody else can make these
transactions.
Now, when the service provider needs to push the client
query (line 3 in the recovery phase, Figure 3), it creates a
transaction with associated data (BID,com), and informs all
the servers about the new transaction. The servers check if the
claimed transaction has indeed been made with the claimed
data, using a lightweight client, and update their internal copy
of the key-value store, along with a counter for number of
attempts. This also means that when a new server joins, it
needs to catch up from the root transaction to the current one.
The above construction requires 1 transaction per query. We
can optimize using batching. That is, when a client makes a
recovery request, the service provider stores the query in mem-
ory. When enough requests have been collected, the service
provider makes a transaction with hash of all (BIDi,comi)
tuples observed, and informs all the servers about the new
transaction and data. Similar to the unbatched variant, the
servers check if the hash of the transaction data matches with
the claimed data, and update their internal map.
As mentioned earlier, FaoKVS could also be implemented
using either traditional HSMs with hardware counter support
or commodity enclaves that integrate other rollback preven-
tion techniques. Such an instantiation would allow the system
to avoid expensive interactions with a blockchain and confir-
mation latency. However, on the downside, this would reduce
the security of the system, as now each HSM would have
an individual counter, enforcing attempt limit per HSM, not
backup. Depending on the access structure used by the client,
this could increase the effective number of attempts. One so-
lution to that would be to use a limit smaller than what you
would use in a blockchain based system; however, even this
solution is not perfect: as at the end of your effective attempt
limit, you would be required to contact certain specific servers
which might not be online, risking losing your secret.
Attestation Document. We configure our TEE binary to per-
form just three functions: (1) generate the PKE key pair, (2)
on joining the pool of TEEs, fast forward to the latest transac-
tion in our FaoKVS and verify that the transactions trace back
to a hard coded root transaction; and (3) respond to recovery
requests after performing necessary checks. As mentioned in
Section 5, we attest to this binary and the generated public key
and provide this attestation document along with the public
key, publicly. Any client can audit this document against the
binary hash before using the associated public key.
7
Evaluation
We deploy and benchmark our construction on server through-
put (i.e. number of recovery queries supported by each server),
client runtimes, and client communication sizes.
System Setup. We deploy the service provider on a Azure
D8as_v5 instance in the Central US region with 32 GiB of
RAM and 8 vCPUs. In production, the service provider should
be deployed on a much more powerful server, as it is a central
coordination point.
We deploy three recovery servers with different confidential
compute engines (i.e. TEEs), with different cloud providers:
1. GCP (c3-standard-8 instance), with Intel TDX
2. GCP (n2d-standard-8 instance), with AMD SEV-SNP
3. AWS (c5.2xlarge instance), with AWS NitroTPM
All servers have 32 GiB of encrypted memory and processor
with 8 vCPUs, and cost between $0.4−0.9 per hour. We use
a MacBook Air with M4 chip as the client. We deploy the
append-only key-value store on Bitcoin testnet.
Client Runtimes. We benchmark our client implementation
to measure the times required to (A) generate the backup,
12

(a) Client runtimes for backup and recovery phase across different
number of servers.
(b) Throughput of different TEE types configured with different num-
ber of threads.
Figure 4: Runtime Benchmarks
Backup Size
Recovery Query Size
n = 3
0.54 KB
32 bytes
n = 100
17.14 KB
32 bytes
Figure 5: Client side query sizes.
and (B) recovery phase (including query generation and share
reconstruction). We plot runtime against the number of servers
used to share the secret in Figure 4a. These numbers are
averaged across 100 runs. Even with 100 servers in the access
structure, our construction requires less than 13ms and 5ms for
backup and reconstruction phases, respectively, on average.
Client Query Sizes. We summarize client’s backup and recov-
ery query sizes in Figure 5. For a single backup to n servers,
the backup contains n ciphertexts and n field elements (for
shamir secret shares masked with PRF output). Each scalar
takes 32 bytes (256 bits) and each ciphertext, in our imple-
mentation, requires 137 bytes. The entire backup struct, for
n = 100, along with all metadata, requires 17551 bytes (≈
17.14 KB). For n = 3, the backup size is 559 bytes. Roughly,
for n servers, the backup size is 33+175n bytes.
For recovery phase, the client only needs to send a single
group element to the service provider, consisting of 32 bytes.
Throughput. To benchmark the throughput of the servers dur-
ing recovery phase, consider the following experimental setup:
the service provider hosts 1000 backups for 1000 clients.
Each backup is configured to require responses from all three
servers. Then, during recovery phase, the service provider
collects recovery queries from all clients. Once all requests
are collected, the service provider makes a Bitcoin transaction.
Once the transaction propagates, the service provider contacts
all of the servers to get back their recovery responses. For all
TEE types (i.e. TDX, SEV-SNP and NitroTPM), we measure
the number of queries supported by the server per second,
in this setup. We run this experiment, 100 times, against the
TEE server configured with different number of threads and
present the averaged numbers in Figure 4b. Our results do not
include the time required to confirm the transaction.
Intel TDX and AMD SEV-SNP provide comparable per-
formance, peaking at 4420 and 4242 queries per second, re-
spectively, while AWS NitroTPM has a slightly lower peak
throughput of 3209 queries per second.
8
Related Works
Password-Protected Secret Sharing Our work is deeply in-
spired by the works on Password Protected Secret Sharing,
first introduced by Bagherzandi et al [4]. There has been a sig-
nificant line of work on improving the efficiency [1,7,19,21]
and providing formal security analysis [20]. Our work builds
on the ideas in these works by confronting the real-world chal-
lenges that come with deploying these systems and providing
security properties like forward secrecy, post-compromise
security, and robustness against PKI compromise.
Rollback Prevention
in
Enclaves.
Nimble
[3]
and
ROTE [29] both consider augmenting TEEs to detect roll-
back attacks. Nimble achieves this by building a ledger, while
ROTE uses a novel distributed algorithm to achieve the same.
These works, however, do not consider how to maintain secu-
rity when the trusted hardware itself can be compromised.
Kaptchuk et al [24] formalize a way to augment a stateless
trusted execution environment with a ledger, to allow the
hardware with limited secure memory to maintain arbitrary
13

states and prevent replay/rollback attacks. They also consider
limiting password attempts using this system.
Secure Key Recovery using Trusted Hardware. There has
also been work on using trusted execution environments to
implement secret key recovery protocols [2], with most pop-
ular implementations of such being by WhatsApp [40] and
Apple [15,16]. These works, however, require HSMs to work
and to the best of our knowledge, assume un-breakability of a
single HSM (or respective trusted hardware).
To overcome this issue, SafetyPin [12] explored the idea
of splitting the secret among low-cost HSMs while limiting
password guesses counters. At its core, SafetyPin clients hash
their password (and some public parameters) to determinis-
tically select a subset of servers and encrypt secret shares of
their message to these servers. This results in a non-interactive
backup procedure similar to ours, but does not make use of the
OPRF template that has become standard. Additionally, Safe-
tyPin explores using puncturable encryption to get forward
secrecy in a very similar manner to our own work. Finally,
they build a distributed log to limit password attempts. While
the ideas presented in SafetyPin are elegant, their construc-
tion suffers from two deployability challenges. First, they
leverage random auditing to ensure the password log is being
constructed honestly, which is risky when the auditors could
be cloud-deployed TEEs, as we consider in our work. Sec-
ond, their construction provides no post-compromise security,
forward secrecy requires clients to actively puncture backups,
and ensuring password-reuse is safe requires active checking
on the part of clients.
SVR3 [11] is a more recent work which was partially de-
ployed by Signal. Similar to our work, they also make use
of OPRF-based PPSS protocol with counters to implement
attempt limits. Instead of public ledgers, they make use of a
modified version of Raft to implement counters. A key limita-
tion of SVR3 is that it is not designed with forward secrecy
or post compromise security in mind. And does not protect
against TEE PKI Compromise.After publication, the authors
of SVR3 added a note about key rotation, in response to identi-
fied issues. It is unclear how it would be implemented at scale,
specifically because SVR3 requires interaction for backups.
Our construction builds on some of the best ideas devel-
oped in SafetyPin and SVR3, while offering improved deploy-
ability and security. Specifically, our non-interactive backup
scheme is similar, in spirit, to the one considered in SafetyPin,
but uses the OPRF approach considered in SVR3 (among oth-
ers). Similarly, SafetyPin leverages the idea that each HSM
should use different key material, but does not consider using
commodity cloud-based TEEs, which SVR3 does. Neither
work first-order considers key rotation.
We note that neither SafetyPin nor SVR3 provide a proofs
of security or formal definitions. Davies et al. [40] provide a
security proof for WhatsApp’s backup system. For a detailed
survey of recovery systems, we refer the reader to [6].
14