SIGMA-RS: A Modular Approach for Keyed-Verification Anonymous Credentials
Michele Orrù
CNRS
Lindsey Tulloch
Tor Project, University of Waterloo
Victor Snyder-Graf
RISC Zero
Ian Goldberg
University of Waterloo
Abstract
We introduce a new software stack in Rust aimed at simpli-
fying constructions and deployments of protocols based on
modern anonymous credential systems.
The stack, called SIGMA-RS, through its layered design,
abstracts cryptographic complexity while remaining flexi-
ble enough to support a range of credential schemes, proofs,
and access policies. It emphasizes misuse resistance via type
safety, domain separation, and prover-state discipline, and
supports side-channel-aware constant-time strategies.
We evaluate practicality through re-implementations of
Tor’s Lox bridge distribution protocols and of user authenti-
cation in the Open Observatory for Network Interference.
1
Introduction
Anonymous credentials (AC), originally introduced by David
Chaum [23], augment classical digital signatures with pri-
vacy: they allow a user to obtain certified attributes from
an issuer and later prove statements about those attributes
while minimizing information leakage. Keyed-verification
credentials [22] (KVAC) refine this model by restricting veri-
fication to designated verifiers holding a secret key: instead
of publicly verifiable proofs, credentials are checked using
verifier-specific keys, yielding compact and efficient protocols
while preserving the essential privacy properties of ACs. Re-
stricting the model to a self-contained environment with only
two parties (an issuer and a client) makes keyed-verification
credentials a fast and stable primitive, particularly appeal-
ing for real-world deployments where access control, rate
limiting, and pseudonymous authentication are required.
In recent years, keyed-verification credentials have at-
tracted significant attention in real-world deployments, partic-
ularly on the web. In the last two years alone, seven Internet
standards [42,50,51,57,59,78,88] focusing on anonymous
credential systems have been proposed to the Internet En-
gineering Task Force (IETF), the body responsible for the
technical standards on the Internet. They have been proposed
as solutions for digital identity [33], replacements for third-
party cookies [21,55], and rate limiting [8]. These primitives
are not only being adopted by large technology companies
to strengthen privacy guarantees, but are also relied upon by
open-source and free software initiatives such as Signal [81]
and Tor [86] to preserve user privacy.
These proposals often re-create the same credential system,
the same interactive proof, and re-implement the Fiat–Shamir
transformation. A number of problems arise from this:
(i) Duplicated effort. Formalizations, security analyses, and
implementations that could be shared are duplicated, at
the expense of additional effort. Key implementation
techniques (for performance, side-channel resistance, se-
cure message encoding, etc.) are scattered across the
literature, rarely captured in specifications, and inconsis-
tently included in implementations.
(ii) Attack surface. The attack surface increases, and vulner-
abilities that commonly appear in these protocols are
likely to be repeated.
(iii) Cryptographic agility. Tight coupling of application
logic within the cryptographic primitives makes tran-
sitions harder. Transitioning to credentials with post-
quantum privacy is already of immediate concern [20].
1.1
Contribution
We propose a new software stack for keyed-verification cre-
dential protocols, consisting of the following layers:
• CMZ, a macro system for specifying anonymous authen-
tication protocols via the CMZ [22] and µCMZ [68]
KVAC schemes. The protocols are converted into speci-
fications of some zero-knowledge proof statements.
• SIGMA-COMPILER, a macro system that converts zero-
knowledge proof statements into Σ-protocol relations.
• SIGMA-PROOFS, a library that implements interactive
and non-interactive Σ-protocols and compressed Σ-

// Credential definition
CMZ! { ArcCredential: m1 }
// Issuance protocol (m1 is hidden)
muCMZProtocol! { issue, ,
Cred: ArcCredential { m1: H },
}
// Presentation protocol
muCMZProtocol! { present<nonce, @TAG, @G>,
Cred: ArcCredential { m1: H }, ,
G = (Cred.m1 + nonce) * TAG
}
// Credential definition
CMZ! { NymCredential: nym_secret }
// Issuance protocol (nym_secret is jointly computed)
muCMZProtocol! { issue, ,
Cred: NymCredential { nym_secret: J },
}
// Presentation protocol
muCMZProtocol! { present<@NYM, @D>,
Cred: NymCredential { nym_secret: H }, ,
NYM = Cred.nym_secret * D
}
Figure
1:
The
credential
systems
described
in
the
Internet
Draftsdraft-yun-cfrg-arc
[88]
and
draft-irtf-cfrg-bbs-per-verif-link [50] (adapted for keyed-verification), in SIGMA-RS. The syntax is discussed in more
detail in Section 7 and Appendix C.
protocols for linear relations, providing generic AND,
OR, and threshold compositions in constant time.
• SPONGEFISH, a library that implements a range of Fiat–
Shamir transformations for different settings.
We evaluate our stack’s integration in two FLOSS projects:
the Tor bridge distribution system and the Open Observatory
of Network Interference. In Figure 1 we showcase how the
stack can be used to simplify existing specifications.
The
artifact accompanying
this
paper is
released
as open-source software and is publicly available at
https://git-crysp.uwaterloo.ca/SigmaProtocol/
sigma-rs-artifact.
1.2
Related work
Modular approaches at credential systems are well-known to
theoreticians. The seminal work of Camenisch and Lysyan-
skaya [17] built core anonymous credential systems by com-
posing signature schemes with zero-knowledge proofs that
can speak the same algebra, and later Chase et al. [22] ex-
tended this approach to message authentication codes (MACs)
for keyed-verification credentials. This core framework was
later extended to support access policies: Camenisch et al. [16]
provided a modular framework for generic access policies in
publicly verifiable credentials, with modules such as selective
disclosure, revocation, and pseudonyms; Orrù [68] brought
this modular framework to keyed-verification credentials.
Anonymous Credential systems.
Anonymous credential
systems in the literature are for the most part monolithic [58],
and so are many Internet Drafts [50, 51, 78]; often witness
generation, the zero-knowledge proof system, and the Fiat–
Shamir transformation are bundled in a single procedure.
Two notable exceptions are Dock Network’s crypto li-
brary [56] and Emmy [87] (in Go, now abandoned), which
experiment with implementing multiple cryptographic pro-
tocols and anonymous credential systems. In contrast, we
provide a complete, production-oriented stack with a concise
language for specifying application-level protocols, a stan-
dalone Fiat–Shamir layer designed for composition across
proof systems, and explicit support for deployment require-
ments such as constant-time execution, standardized message
formats, and widely used elliptic-curve implementations.
Σ-protocols.
Most frameworks built around Σ-protocols
are built with modularity in mind. de Valence [31,32] built a
zero-knowledge proof system for Maurer proofs; libscapi [47]
uses them as a component for multi-party computation pro-
tocols; zksk [60] builds generic Σ-protocols with OR- and
AND- composition. The idea of a compiler for linear state-
ments was also previously investigated by Bangerter et al. [5].
We augment all of the above with compressed Σ-protocols,
threshold composition, and a macro system that compiles
complex statements into linear relations. The relations gen-
erated are compatible with the Σ-protocol and Fiat–Shamir
Internet Drafts [69,70].
Fiat–Shamir.
The Fiat–Shamir transformation is often hard-
coded within proof systems; however, there do exist libraries
built around the idea of a stateful hash object that is then used
by an interactive proof system. Notable examples are Signal’s
POKSHO [82], which focuses on compression functions; the
SAFE framework [4], which focuses on algebraic permutation
functions; and Hamburg’s STROBE framework [48], which
focuses on binary permutation functions. SPONGEFISH takes
this forward by integrating different approaches, generic hash
functions, circuit building, and grinding, while maintaining
compatibility with the IETF specification [69].
2
Preliminaries
Commitment schemes.
A commitment scheme lets one
party commit to a value while keeping it hidden, yet guaran-
teeing it cannot be changed later. Let G be an additive group
2

of prime order p where discrete logarithm is hard, and G is a
generator. Pedersen commitments [72] allow committing to
a value x ∈Zp by sampling a randomness variable r ←$ Zp
and setting C := xG + rH, where G,H are computationally
independent generators (group generators whose respective
discrete logarithms are not known to the committer). We say
that C is a Pedersen commitment, and (x,r) its opening, via
which it is possible to check that C was indeed a commitment
to x. Pedersen commitments have the important property that
if the committer proves knowledge of x,y,r,s such that both
C = xG+rH and C = yG+sH, then it must be the case that
x = y and r = s.
Σ-protocols. We briefly recap Σ-protocols from Cramer [26]
as described in Boneh–Shoup [10, §19.4]. The prover begins
by sending a commitment message to the verifier. This mes-
sage is generated using randomness and may internally store
some state that will be needed later. The verifier responds with
a random challenge chosen uniformly from a fixed challenge
space. The prover computes a response using the witness, the
previously stored state, and the challenge. Finally, the verifier
checks the full transcript (commitment, challenge, and re-
sponse) and outputs an accept or reject decision. A transcript
is valid if it is accepted by the verifier.
Σ-protocols enjoy two security properties: special sound-
ness (which guarantees that a witness must have been known
by the prover if the transcript is valid), and honest-verifier
zero-knowledge (which guarantees that no information about
the witness is revealed).
Two well-known examples of Σ-protocols used in our con-
struction are Schnorr’s protocol [79], which proves knowledge
of a discrete logarithm and Okamoto’s protocol [65], for prov-
ing knowledge of the opening of a Pedersen commitment.
These protocols and their associated extractors are standard
and well documented in the literature.
Although Σ-protocols are interactive public-coin proofs,
in practice they are almost always made non-interactive us-
ing the Fiat–Shamir transformation, which replaces the ver-
ifier’s random challenge with the output of a cryptographic
hash function, resulting in a single message, called the non-
interactive argument string, that will be able to convince
any verifier.
Keyed-Verification Credentials.
A keyed-verification cre-
dential system involves two parties: an issuer and a client. The
issuer generates a secret verification key together with public
parameters that define the system. The public parameters are
used by clients when interacting with the issuer, while the se-
cret key is required to issue and verify credentials. The system
involves two main protocols: issuance and presentation.
In the issuance protocol, the client interacts with the issuer
to obtain a credential on a vector of attributes. The client
inputs their attributes, and the issuer the secret key. At the
end of the protocol execution, the client obtains a credential
for their attributes, valid under the secret key. No information
about the secret key is revealed to the client. Client attributes
Lox [86]
OONI [66]
···
Application layer
CMZ [22]
µCMZ [68]
···
CMZ
disjunction invariant
transformations:
public scalars, substitution rules,
scalar equality,range proofs
code generation
SIGMA-COMPILER
composed relations
AND-, OR-, threshold-
Maurer proofs
compressed sigmas
SIGMA-PROOFS
codecs
prover state
verifier state
oracle instantiations
XOF, permutation functions, compression functions
SPONGEFISH
SIGMA-RS
Figure 2: A high-level view of our software stack, highlighting
the application layer and the constituent crates. The dashed
outline groups the credential, compiler, proof and Fiat–Shamir
layers into the main library.
can be partially hidden, or jointly computed with the issuer.
In the presentation protocol, the client proves to the is-
suer that they possess a valid credential whose underlying
attributes satisfy a given predicate. The client reveals no ad-
ditional information about the attributes beyond the fact that
the predicate holds. The issuer uses its secret key to verify the
proof and outputs a single accept/reject bit.
A secure keyed-verification credential system must satisfy
three high-level properties. Correctness ensures that honestly
issued credentials can always be successfully presented for
any predicate that the underlying attributes satisfy. Anonymity
guarantees that protocol interactions with an honest client
do not reveal the client’s attributes, except for what is logi-
cally implied by the issuance and presentation predicate. Ex-
tractability means that for any successful issuance or presen-
tation protocol, the client really must have had possession of
a valid credential for those attributes. We point the curious
reader to Orrù [68] for a formal, game-based treatment of
these definitions.
3
Architecture and system design
Figure 2 summarizes the stack and the section layout that
follows: each layer corresponds to a crate, and the paper
proceeds from the bottom of the stack upward. At the base,
the Spongefish/Fiat–Shamir layer provides prover and ver-
ifier state machines, codecs, and oracle instantiations over
standard hash or permutation primitives. The sigma-proofs
layer builds on this to compose protocols (AND-, OR-, and
3

threshold relations) and to offer compressed Σ-protocols.
The sigma-compiler layer enforces the disjunction invariant,
applies a sequence of invariant-preserving transformations
(public scalars, substitution rules, scalar equality, and range
proofs), and produces code for concrete protocols. On top,
the credentials layer instantiates concrete schemes such as
CMZ14 and µCMZ, which are then consumed by applications
like Lox and OONI outside the SIGMA-RS crate boundary.
This layered structure keeps each crate independently us-
able while supporting a clean integration path: applications
can depend on the credential layer, or reuse lower-level com-
ponents directly, and the compiler and proof layers remain
available for protocols beyond credentials.
4
The SPONGEFISH crate
The Fiat–Shamir transformation turns a public-coin interac-
tive proof into a non-interactive argument by replacing verifier
challenges with a cryptographic hash output. Since its intro-
duction [40], the term has come to encompass a family of
heuristics rather than a single, precisely defined primitive.
In the proof-systems literature, the canonical Fiat–Shamir
transformation defines the i-th challenge as the output of
a random oracle queried on the instance x and all prover
messages α1,...,αi sent so far. Although this transformation
is proven secure in the random oracle model and widely used
in theory, it is rarely implemented directly in practice.1
In practice, engineers do not have access to ideal random
oracles over arbitrary domains, but instead rely on standard
primitives such as compression functions (e.g., SHA-256 [63],
BLAKE2 [75]) and permutation functions (e.g., SHA-3 [64],
Poseidon [45,46]).
While programming languages expose safe APIs for fixed-
and variable-length hash outputs (e.g., digest::Digest and
digest::ExtensibleOutput in Rust), a substantial gap re-
mains between these interfaces and a correct Fiat–Shamir
instantiation. The latter requires managing prover and verifier
state and securely encoding and serializing protocol messages
into the hash domain. These steps are typically left to the
implementer, and ad-hoc solutions in deployed systems have
led to numerous vulnerabilities, as surveyed in Appendix A.
Multiple Fiat–Shamir transformations.
SPONGEFISH pro-
vides the following Fiat–Shamir transformations:
• a transformation from extendable-output functions
(XOFs), which implements the canonical XOF Fiat–
Shamir transformation. This is instantiated for SHAKE-
128 [64] and is the simplest, most immediate transforma-
tion that matches the ongoing RFC [69];
• a transformation from generic permutations (over any
domain), via the Duplex Sponge Fiat–Shamir transforma-
1The limitations of Fiat–Shamir are well known [6, 43]. Recent work
derives Fiat–Shamir-like transformations from standard assumptions using
correlation-intractable hash functions [18], but these constructions remain
impractical. We therefore focus on random oracle instantiations.
tion [24]. This transformation can be particularly useful
in light of more recent algebraic hash functions that are
“friendly” to zero-knowledge circuits;
• a transformation from “legacy” hash functions inte-
faces that absorb arbitrary-length inputs and output fixed-
length digests, via the POKSHO transformation [82].
The library defines an interface for generic absorb/squeeze
operations called DuplexSpongeInterface, implemented
by all above transformations (and potential custom, novel
ones). The interface supports custom prover and verifier state.
Mapping to/from the hash function.
Providing a general
interface for any hash function, over any domain, highlights
another issue often disregarded in both academic papers as
well as concrete implementations: prover messages must be
encoded into the hash function domain securely, and verifier
messages must be mapped to the challenge domain preserving
the challenge distribution.
SPONGEFISH provide two interfaces for mapping complex
types to/from the hash function domain: Encoding<T> maps
a type T into a sequence of elements in the alphabet of the
hash functions (bytes or field elements; any type with a zero
element and size known at compile time), and Decoding<U>
maps a set of hash function outputs into a type U. Encoding
implementations must provide a prefix-free injective map into
the random oracle domain, and Decoding implementations
must preserve the uniform distribution. These requirements
cannot be enforced at the type system level (as Rust’s compiler
is not powerful enough), but they are scoped and highlighted
as they are crucial for soundness and honest-verifier zero-
knowledge.
Encoding and malleability.
Incorrect or non-injective en-
codings of prover messages in the Fiat–Shamir transformation
can lead to malleable proofs and concrete soundness failures.
For example, in DSA-style constructions, distinct commit-
ment messages K and −K map to the same hash input, result-
ing in identical challenges and enabling malleability attacks.
Similarly, the reference implementation of hash-to-curve [38]
does not enforce canonical representatives, leading to proofs
where multiple encodings of the same group element yield
the same challenge. Such issues have been exploited in the
past. [1]
To prevent these attacks, the function used to absorb mes-
sages into the Fiat–Shamir transcript must be injective and
prefix-free, and this is enforced by the Encoding trait.2
While verifier challenges in the interactive protocol are
uniform elements of Zp, hash functions output uniformly
distributed bit strings. Correct decoding from a hash output
to the challenge space is done via the Decoding interface.
Encoding and Decoding are implemented for all built-in
integer types and byte arrays; with specific feature flags, we
also support algebraic objects from common algebraic li-
2In the literature, this property is referred to as simulation extractabil-
ity [76] for proof systems and strong unforgeability [36] for signatures.
4

braries such as p3-koala-bear, p3-baby-bear, risc0-ff,
cruve25519-dalek, k256, ark-ff, pallas, bls12-381,
and more. Whenever different libraries re-implement the same
object, we add interoperability tests.
Prover and verifier state.
The non-interactive prover and
verifier are responsible not only for deriving public coins, but
also for serializing and parsing the non-interactive argument
string.
In practice, several Fiat–Shamir vulnerabilities have
stemmed from inconsistencies between the serialized proof
and the transcript absorbed by the hash function [25,41]. Com-
mon implementations store prover messages in a Proof struc-
ture while separately hashing them, making it easy to omit
messages or hash them in the wrong order. Such mistakes
have led to concrete soundness failures [41] and ordering
attacks identified by Ciobotaru et al. [25].
In SPONGEFISH, the prover state owns both the public coins
and proof serialization, while the verifier state mirrors this by
parsing the argument string from the same transcript, prevent-
ing these classes of bugs at the API level.
Domain separation and cross-protocol attacks.
In addi-
tion to the prover messages, the Fiat–Shamir transformation
requires three additional components: the protocol identifier,
that uniquely identifies the non-interactive protocol being
built (e.g., “sigma-proofs_Shake128_P256”); the session
identifier, corresponding to session and sub-session identi-
fiers in universal composability (e.g., the URL and timestamp
“ooni.org/userauth 723310200”); and the instance being
proven (e.g., the linear relation being proven). The developer
is in charge of making sure they are chosen appropriately,
but SPONGEFISH provides a helper struct DomainSeparator
that allows the user to input strings for each of them, and
processes them into a format compatible with the IETF speci-
fication [69].
5
The SIGMA-PROOFS crate
In his PhD thesis, Cramer [26] introduced the notion of Σ-
protocols as a 3-message, special sound and special honest-
verifier zero-knowledge proof system. Maurer proofs [26,61]
are an elegant Σ-protocol for proving knowledge of the pre-
image of a group morphism M : Zn
p →Gm:
R :=
n
(⃗x,⃗X): M ·⃗x = ⃗X
o
.
(1)
These protocols have very strong security properties: they
are unconditionally special sound and statistically zero-
knowledge
which can be seen as proving knowledge of
(x1,...,xn) in a set of equations jointly proven together:
X1 = x1 ·M1,1 +···+xn ·M1,n ,
...
Xm = xm ·Mm,1 +···+xn ·Mm,n .
Schnorr relations are a trivial example with n = m = 1 and
M = [G], for proving knowledge of x such that X = xG. More
involved linear relations are possible:
Example 1 (Chaum–Pedersen). In Chaum–Pedersen the
prover shows knowledge of x,r,s such that C and D are Ped-
ersen commitments to the same x under independent random-
ness. In this case, the morphism can be represented as:
C = xG+rH ,
D = xG+sH .
Variants of the above have been widely used in the VRF
literature (Jarecki et al. [49]), and the anonymous token liter-
ature (Davidson et al. [30,71]).
Other more complex relations, such as affine relations with
constant terms or quadratic equations, can still be reduced to
this form. In fact, satisfiability of any arithmetic circuit (and
thus any NP relation) can be proven with this relation family.
Example 2 (Single-bit range proof). In a single-bit range
proof, the prover shows knowledge of a Pedersen commitment
C = bG + rH to a bit b. This can be done via the Chaum–
Pedersen relation, proving:
C = bG+rH ,
C = bC +sH .
In fact, substituting the second equation into the first one
yields C = bC +sH = b(bG+rH)+sH = b2G+(br +s)H
and so b = b2 =⇒b ∈{0,1}.
From an implementation perspective, the group element
matrices are often sparse, so we use a Yale/CSR-style repre-
sentation [13] instead of dense matrices. In SIGMA-PROOFS,
the relation is expressed in terms of typed indices (ScalarVar
for witness scalars and GroupVar for group elements), and
each constraint stores only the nonzero terms as a list of
weighted pairs (ScalarVar,GroupVar).
Relations are built through the LinearRelation interface.
This type allows for allocating group and scalar variables,
representing symbols in the relation. Using Rust arithmetic
operator implementations, statements such as x * G are used
to construct constraints.
let mut relation = LinearRelation::new();
let x_var = relation.allocate_scalar();
let G_var = relation.allocate_element();
let P_var = relation.allocate_eq(x_var * G_var);
let x = Grp::Scalar::from(42);
relation.set_element(G_var, Grp::generator());
relation.set_element(P_var, x * Grp::generator());
Public constants are represented using a unit scalar term
with an explicit weight, so affine offsets do not introduce ex-
tra witness variables. The canonicalization step moves those
constants to the left-hand side; e.g., C = 2G +rH becomes
5

(C −2G) = rH, so the runtime only sees linear combination
statements. The resulting canonical relation is thus a list of
sparse terms, that can be efficiently represented as follows:
encode the number of equations, then for each equation the
number of terms and their indices, followed by the serialized
group elements.
A trait SigmaProtocol exposes the three-move struc-
ture of Σ-protocols explicitly. It fixes associated types for
the commitment, prover state, response, witness, and chal-
lenge, and requires prover_commit, prover_response, and
verifier methods. Implementations also define serializa-
tion and deserialization for each proof component plus a
protocol_identifier and an instance_label so Fiat–
Shamir transcripts can bind to the protocol and instance.
In Appendix B we describe how LinearRelation may
also be used for producing succinct arguments of knowledge
(SNARKs, in the style of bulletproofs [14]), through the more
recent line of literature of compressed Σ-protocols [3].
5.1
Protocol composition
Two parameterized implementations of SigmaProtocol are
provided: CanonicalLinearRelation<G> implements a
Σ-protocol conforming to the draft IETF standard for linear
relations over the group G, and ComposedRelation<G>
implements
standard
AND/OR/threshold
composition
following
Cramer, Damgård, and Schoenmakers
[27].
ComposedRelation represents a tree of sub-protocols with
nodes Simple, And, Or, and Threshold(t,...). Each node
implements SigmaProtocol by delegating to its children.
For AND, the prover commits and responds for every child
under the same challenge. For OR, the prover selects one
branch for which it has a witness (the real branch) and
simulates all other branches. In particular, the prover assigns
random challenges to the simulated branches. Upon receiving
the verifier’s challenge e, the prover sets the remaining
challenge for the real branch so that the sum of all per-branch
challenges equals e. The prover then sends the first n −1
challenges, and the responses for every branch; the verifier
recomputes the missing challenge from the sum and verifies
each branch transcript.
For threshold t-of-n, the prover performs a t-of-n secret
sharing of the global challenge. Concretely, it samples a ran-
dom degree-(n −t) polynomial whose constant term is the
global challenge and evaluates it at n distinct points to derive
per-branch challenges. The prover transmits a compressed
representation consisting of the n−t polynomial coefficients,
from which the verifier reconstructs all branch challenges
during verification.
5.2
Constant time strategy
Any operations over secret data must be constant-time [54].
In the case of keyed-verification credentials, this includes
the zero-knowledge verifier, because verification uses the
server’s secret key. Constant-time group arithmetic alone is
insufficient: operation ordering and data-dependent memory
access can also create timing side-channels.
This can manifest in several forms. In range proofs, the
Hamming weight or bit decomposition of the witness can
influence the number of group operations performed. In OR-
and threshold compositions, the witness determines which
branches correspond to true statements and which are sim-
ulated; the prover algorithm and the simulator are distinct
procedures with distinct timing signatures, and so a naïve im-
plementation therefore leaks information about the witness.
For linear relations as described in Section 5, achiev-
ing
constant
time
is
comparatively
straightforward:
the prover reduces to evaluating a fixed group mor-
phism. In our implementation, the morphism underlying
CanonicalLinearRelation
is
evaluated
using
only
constant-time group operations and witness-independent
memory access patterns.
For OR-proofs, we proceed as follows. First, the witness is
checked against all branches, and the resulting validity bits are
stored. Then, for every branch, both the prover algorithm and
the simulator are executed unconditionally. The actual com-
mitment is selected using constant-time conditional swaps
based on the validity bits. This ensures that the sequence of
executed operations and memory accesses is independent of
which branch is true.
In threshold proofs, the prover must select exactly t-out-of-
n true branches in order to perform polynomial interpolation.
Selecting these t elements is witness-dependent, and perform-
ing it naïvely will leak which branches are true. The solution
is oblivious compaction: given a secret selection bitmask over
an array of n items, compact the selected items into the first t
positions without revealing which items were selected.
A direct oblivious compaction can be implemented in
O(n2) time by scanning and conditionally swapping all pairs.
More efficient fully oblivious algorithms are known: in partic-
ular, Sasy et al. [77] give an O(nlogn) algorithm with deter-
ministic memory access patterns and control flow, originally
developed in the context of trusted execution environments
(TEEs). We rely on this style of oblivious compaction to
implement threshold Σ-protocols with witness-independent
execution traces.
We test our implementation for constant-timedness using
the statistical techniques of DudeCT [74]. This approach as-
sesses the runtime behavior of the implementation on a partic-
ular machine, and is a useful litmus test. It is complementary
to, although generally weaker than, guarantees provided by
symbolic execution based techniques such as Binsec [28]
which are more difficult to apply and require a timing model
for the underlying machine.
6

6
The SIGMA-COMPILER crate
The next level up in our architecture is the SIGMA-COMPILER
crate. This crate provides a compile-time macro for easy
declarative definitions of Σ-protocols. As a compile-time
macro, none of the machinery described in this section has
to be shipped to servers or clients; this is particularly im-
portant when the ZKP code is bundled into a small app or
WebAssembly (wasm) binary (see Section 8).
The syntax is similar to that of de Valence’s zkp crate [32],
described in Section 1.2, but with a more expressive language.
A simple example proves the morphism from Example 1:
sigma_compiler!{ dleq<Grp>,
(x, rand r, rand s),
(C, D, cind G, cind H),
C = x*G + r*H,
D = x*G + s*H,
}
Data types.
This macro invocation (indicated by ! in
Rust) creates a Rust module called dleq implementing a
Σ-protocol over the group Grp (where Grp implements Rust’s
PrimeGroup trait).3
The protocol involves three scalars (x, r, s) of type Scalar,
and four group elements (C, D, G, H) of type Point. The proto-
col will prove the listed statements (implicitly connected by
AND).
Each listed Scalar can be optionally tagged with one
or more of the tags pub, rand, or vec. pub means that the
Scalar is public; this can be used for public parameters to
the protocol, such as the limits of ranges, or other constants
that can appear in the statements. Any Scalar not marked
as pub is assumed to be private to the prover, and the verifier
will learn nothing about that value other than what is implied
by the truth of the statements. rand means that the Scalar
is a uniform random Scalar; these are typically used as ran-
domizers in Pedersen commitments. A rand variable cannot
be pub. vec means that the variable represents a vector of
Scalars, as opposed to a single Scalar. The number of en-
tries in the vector can be set at run time, when the Σ-protocol
is executed.
Similarly, each listed Point can be optionally tagged with
one or more of the tags cind or vec. All Point variables
are considered public, but expressions evaluating to a Point
may be public or private; for example, multiplying a private
Scalar by a public Point yields a private Point expression.
(In general, an expression is public if all of its components
are public, and private if any of its components is private.)
Points tagged with cind are computationally independent
(see Section 2). Typically, these elements would be generators
of the group, generated with a hash-to-group function [39].
Points marked cind are typically the bases used in Pedersen
3If the optional group specifier <Grp> is omitted, sigma_compiler de-
faults to using a group literally called G.
commitments. vec means that the variable represents a vector
of Points, as opposed to a single Point. The number of en-
tries in the vector can be set at run time, when the Σ-protocol
is executed.
Statements. The most basic statement is the linear combina-
tion statement. This kind of statement proves that a Point (or
an expression evaluating to a public Point) is a linear com-
bination of other Points. The coefficients on the Points are
arithmetic expressions involving Scalars, integer constants,
and the operations +, -, *, with the restriction that two private
subexpressions cannot be multiplied. For example, if capital-
ized variables represent Points, a is a public Scalar, and x
and y are private Scalars, then (a-1)*C = 2*(a+1)*x*G -
5*(y-2)*H is a valid linear combination statement. The basic
linear combination statement is the only type of statement
supported by the lower-layer SIGMA-PROOFS crate, and so
one of the roles of the SIGMA-COMPILER crate is to com-
pile more complex statement types into linear combination
statements.
The statements in the sigma_compiler macro can be
combined with arbitrarily nested AND, OR, and THRESH
combiners, forming a tree structure called the statement
tree, where leaves are statements, and interior nodes are
AND/OR/THRESH combiners. As mentioned above, a list
of statements with no explicit combiner is considered to be
combined with AND.
Compilation.
The module output by the macro contains:
(i) a struct Instance containing all the Points and pub-
lic Scalars specified in the macro invocation; (ii) a struct
Witness containing all the private Scalars specified in the
macro invocation; (iii) a function prove that consumes an
Instance and a Witness, and outputs a proof as a byte
array (Vec<u8>); (iv) a function verify that consumes an
Instance and a proof, and outputs a Result indicating suc-
cess or failure.
The stages of the sigma_compiler macro are (i) rewrite
the statement tree so that it satisfies the disjunction invariant;
(ii) apply transformations to the statement tree to convert
complex statements into basic linear combination statements,
preserving the disjunction invariant; (iii) output Rust code
that uses the SIGMA-PROOFS API to implement a prover and
a verifier for the resulting statement tree of linear combination
statements with AND/OR/THRESH combiners.
6.1
The disjunction invariant
The disjunction invariant is a technical condition on the struc-
ture and variables of the statement tree that prevents leakage
from shared commitments across OR branches. It states that
no private Scalar may appear both inside and outside any
branch of a disjunction (an OR or THRESH combiner). For
example, if capital letters are Point variables, and lowercase
letters are private Scalar variables, then the following state-
ment trees all violate the disjunction invariant:
7

• OR (D = x*A + s*B, E = x*A + t*B)
• AND (C = x*G + r*H,
OR (D = x*A + s*B, E = y*A + t*B))
• OR (D = x*A + s*B,
AND ( E = x*A + r*B, F = y*A + t*B))
In contrast, the following one satisfies the invariant:
• THRESH (2, C = y*A + s*B, D = z*A + u*B,
AND ( E = x*A + r*B, F = x*A + t*B))
A naive ZKP implementation might produce a single com-
mitment for each private variable in the statement tree. How-
ever, each branch of a disjunction will receive its own chal-
lenge, and responding to two different challenges for the same
commitment reveals the private witness. This is the reason
for the disjunction invariant.
The sigma_compiler macro converts a statement tree that
violates the disjunction invariant to a logically equivalent one
that satisfies it as follows. For each private Scalar it scans
the statement tree to see if it appears in leaves in more than
one disjunction branch (including the root disjunction branch,
which is the set of nodes in the tree outside of all disjunc-
tions). If so, it (i) finds or inserts a Pedersen commitment to
the variable in the root disjunction branch,4 (ii) renames all
instances of the variable in each non-root disjunction branch
to a name unique to that disjunction branch, and (iii) adds
a Pedersen commitment with the same commitment value
as the one in step (i) to the renamed variable, with a fresh
randomness variable in each disjunction branch in which it
appears.
Take the second violating example in the list above. Step
(i) finds the existing Pedersen commitment C = x*G + r*H
in the root disjunction branch; step (ii) renames the other in-
stance of x to, say, x1; step (iii) adds a Pedersen commitment
C = x1*G + z*H to the disjunction branch now containing
x1 using the AND combiner. This results in a statement tree
equivalent to the original, which does satisfy the disjunction
invariant:
• AND (C = x*G + r*H,
OR (AND (D = x1*A + s*B, C = x1*G + z*H),
E = y*A + t*B))
The observation is that, by the definition of the computa-
tionally independent Points used in the Pedersen commit-
ments, if the prover proves that C = x*G + r*H and also C
= x1*G + z*H (with the same C), then it must be the case
that x=x1; this binds together the values of the original and
renamed variables.
While previous work [60] recognized the problem of a
private variable appearing both inside and outside a disjunc-
tion, that system simply rejects such a statement, whereas our
SIGMA-COMPILER crate rewrites the statement automatically.
4Finding and using an existing commitment improves the efficiency of
the ultimate proof, saving both proof size and runtime.
6.2
Transformations
After converting the statement tree into an equivalent one
that satisfies the disjunction invariant, the sigma_compiler
macro applies transformations to handle statement types other
than linear combination statements. Linear combination state-
ments about Points are the only kinds of statements that
SIGMA-PROOFS can handle. The SIGMA-COMPILER trans-
formations provide an easy way to specify statements about
Scalars (the values committed to in Pedersen commitments,
for example).
Scalar substitution.
The first transfor

[…middle truncated for length…]

acro invocation will also state how to han-
dle each attribute in each credential. Attributes in presented
credentials can be (H)idden from the issuer, (R)evealed to
the issuer, or be (I)mplicitly known by both the client and the
issuer. Attributes in issued credentials can have those specifi-
cations, but also be (S)et by the issuer, or (J)ointly created by
the client and the issuer. In joint creation, as used by Lox [86]
to generate credential unique identifiers for example, the is-
suer learns no information about the value of the credential,
and the client has no influence over its value.
As an example, the code to create a protocol to spend some
of the balance in a Wallet on an Item could be:
muCMZProtocol! { wallet_spend<max_balance>,
[ W: Wallet { randid: R, balance: H },
I: Item { serialno: H, price: H } ],
N: Wallet { randid: J, balance: H },
(0..=max_balance).contains(N.balance),
W.balance = N.balance + I.price
}
This
macro
invocation
creates
a
protocol called
wallet_spend, with
a
public
Scalar
parameter
max_balance. The first argument is a list of two cre-
dentials to show: a Wallet called W, and a Item called I. The
5Option in Rust denotes partial value; i.e., a value that may either contain
a Scalar or contain nothing (None), making the absence of a value explicit
and type safe.
10

randid attribute of W will be revealed to the issuer during
the protocol (to prevent double spending; i.e., presenting
an already-spent credential), while the balance attribute,
and both attributes of I, will be hidden from the issuer (but
statements about them may be proved in zero knowledge).
The next argument to the macro are the credentials to is-
sue, in this case the single credential N, of type Wallet. The
randid attribute of N will be jointly created, and the balance
attribute will be hidden from the issuer.
The remaining arguments form a statement tree, with the
same syntax as in the SIGMA-COMPILER crate. In this case,
the protocol proves that the balance in the issued Wallet is
computed correctly, and has not gone negative.
The generated API.
Like the sigma_compiler macro, the
CMZ protocol creation macro creates a Rust module con-
taining all of the data structures and code needed to ex-
ecute the credential protocol. Continuing with the above
wallet_spend example, the name of the module would be
wallet_spend. The module would contain definitions for the
following structs: (i) Params, which encapsulates the public
parameters to the protocol (in this example, max_balance);
(ii) Request, which is the (single) message sent from the
client to the issuer in the protocol; (iii) Reply, which is the
(single) message sent from the issuer to the client in the pro-
tocol; (iv) ClientState, encapsulating the client state that
the client needs to keep between the time the Request is
sent and the Reply is received. The Request, Reply, and
ClientState structs are opaque to the programmer, but are
serializable so that they can be stored or transmitted. If the
protocol specifies zero credentials to issue, then Reply and
ClientState are empty and unneeded; the resulting proto-
col is non-interactive in that case, with just a single Request
going from the client to the issuer.
The module defines a function called prepare. This func-
tion is run by the client to start the protocol. It takes as input
the Params (if any), the credentials that are presented in the
protocol (W and I in this example), as well as incomplete cre-
dentials that are to be issued (N). An incomplete credential
would definitely not yet have its MAC filled in, and would
also be missing any attributes marked as (S)et by the issuer
or (J)ointly created, since the client would not yet know the
values those attributes will eventually have. The prepare
function returns a Request and a ClientState. The client
will serialize the Request and send it to the issuer.
The module also defines a function called handle. This
function is run by the issuer upon receipt of a Request. The
handle function takes as input the received Request, and two
callbacks, fill_creds and authorize. The handle func-
tion will read the request, and use it to fill in the revealed
attributes from the shown and issued credentials (in this case,
just W.randid). The hidden attributes from the credentials
will be set to None, as will the implicit, set by issuer, and joint
creation attributes. It is the job of the fill_creds callback
to (i) generate a Params struct appropriate to the request; (ii)
set the values of the implicit and set by issuer attributes (if
any) for each shown and issued credential; (iii) set the private
keys for each credential.
The handle function will then check that the credentials
shown by the client are all valid, and verifies the proof of
the statements given in the macro invocation. If so, handle
will call the authorize callback, which can do any final
application-specific checks on the credentials, such as check-
ing for double spending. If authorize returns successfully,
then handle will issue the credentials to be issued (in this
case, the new Wallet credential). It will return a Reply and
copies of the shown and issued credentials (but the attributes
not visible to the issuer will still be None). The issuer will
serialize the Reply and send it to the client.
The client’s ClientState has a method called finalize
that consumes a Reply, and returns completed versions of the
credentials to be issued (N in this example).
As another example, in Appendix C we demonstrate how
to use the CMZ crate to implement rate limiting [8,15,52,83].
8
Applications in censorship circumvention
One use case of anonymous credential systems is establishing
a notion of trust among anonymous users. In this setting, users
may be reluctant to provide any kind of proof of identity in ex-
change for access since most suitable forms are either issued,
or else easily tampered with, by bodies closely connected to
those that impose internet censorship. It is therefore important
to be strategic in balancing the availability and openness of
anonymous credential systems against the risk of enumeration
or DoS attacks from censors or otherwise malicious users. To
address this, credential attributes, such as creation time and
measurements of a credential holder’s behaviour, can be used
to determine the trustworthiness of a user while maintaining
anonymity. This can help to safeguard highly effective tools
for users with an established level of trust.
However, it can be difficult for the benefits of implementing
and maintaining anonymous credential systems to outweigh
the complexity. The modular software stack that we have
presented in this work, which allows a developer to abstract
away the low-level complexity of an anonymous credential
system, along with the expressiveness in the statements we
have developed as part of the SIGMA-COMPILER layer, re-
duces the overhead involved in developing and maintaining
these systems, making them much more accessible.
Here we describe our re-implementation of an existing cen-
sorship resistance anonymous credential system, Lox [86],
and describe the advantages of using our system over the
previous implementation. We also describe a new censor-
ship resistance anonymous credential system that we imple-
mented for the Open Observatory of Network Interference
(OONI) [66].
11

8.1
Lox
Lox is a censorship-resistant bridge distribution system de-
veloped by Tulloch and Goldberg [86] to address the bridge
distribution problem, where secret resources (“bridges”) in-
tended for genuine users are distributed in an environment
where there is a high likelihood they may be intercepted and
blocked by censors first. Lox reduces the ability of a censor
to enumerate bridges by prioritizing distribution of bridges
through the social graph of users who have accumulated trust
over time.
Tor [34], an overlay network that enables anonymous com-
munication over the internet, provides bridges to help cen-
sored users connect to the free and open internet. Tor has
adopted Lox [84] to help address the bridge distribution prob-
lem for Tor bridges and deployed Lox in an alpha version of
the Tor browser; it is currently undergoing further develop-
ment prior to a testing release.
Integration with Tor has led to some changes from the orig-
inal Lox implementation. Lox was originally implemented us-
ing the CMZ14 algebraic MAC anonymous credential scheme
by Chase et al. [22]. Recently, Orrù [68] has shown that sta-
tistical anonymity and improvements to issuer efficiency can
be achieved using their µCMZ scheme and the Tor develop-
ers integrated these changes into Lox. To perform the zero-
knowledge proofs, Lox protocols were implemented using
de Valence’s zkp crate [32]; however, that crate has not been
updated since Lox was originally developed and many of the
libraries it depends on have become outdated, leading to Tor
developers maintaining a fork of the zkp crate that can be
updated along with Lox. Finally, to address the logistics of
deploying to numerous users, privacy-preserving key rotation
protocols for some Lox credential keys were created to limit
the storage requirements for spent ID attributes over time.
Overview of the credential extension.
We used the SIGMA-
RS crates described in this work to re-implement the protocols
in the Lox library, forking the project from its current state
as part of the Lox workspace maintained by Tor [84]. Our
re-implementation preserves the functionality of the original
system described by Tulloch and Goldberg [86] as well as the
additional functions added for integration with Tor.
We compared the lines of code required to implement each
of the Lox protocols with the SIGMA-RS crates against the
original implementation, which used the zkp crate to imple-
ment both the CMZ [22] and µCMZ [68] versions of the
protocols. We see that the switch to µCMZ reduced the code
required to express the same proofs, especially for the is-
suance proofs. However, with our muCMZProtocol macro,
we are able to define the same behaviour for both client and
issuer proofs in a single compact statement, reducing the code
significantly for every protocol as shown in Table 1. We have
included in Appendix D, a comparison of the lines of code for
just the proof declarations of each protocol as well as code
snippets for the proofs from one of the µCMZ protocols for
Table 1: Lines of code required for a developer to implement
each of the Lox protocols, including request and issuance
proofs, using the zkp crate versus our SIGMA-RS crates. We
see the reduction in code from CMZ14 to µCMZ using the
zkp library but a much larger reduction in code for all Lox
protocols using SIGMA-RS.
Lox Protocol
Lines of code (LOC)
zkp crate
SIGMA-RS
CMZ14
µCMZ
µCMZ
Open Invitation
287
241
121
Trust Promotion
436
419
147
Trust Migration
398
320
129
Level Up
818
698
195
Issue Invitation
730
459
134
Redeem Invitation
495
387
115
Check Blockage
271
247
147
Blockage Migration
514
398
131
Update Invite
439
285
111
Update Credential
556
323
117
both the zkp crate implementation compared with using the
SIGMA-RS crates. Our crates also eliminate overhead code
required to enable communication between a client and server
and greatly reduce the complexity involved with building
anonymous credentials systems. This is particularly evident
with range proofs.
We orchestrated tests of each of the Lox protocols using
a Rust native client and server as well as a wasm client and
Rust native server and collected the time required to create
a Lox request and handle the response (on the client side)
and generate a response on the server side in each of these
runtime environments. The tests were run on a Framework 16
laptop with an AMD Ryzen 9 7940HS processor supporting
AVX512 instructions. Each test was run 10 times for each
protocol, for each environment. The results in Table 2 show
timings that are reasonable for modern web applications such
as Tor for each of the protocols in both environments. They
are also comparable to the original Lox implementation. We
also ran tests to collect the request and response sizes in bytes,
displayed in Appendix D, which are also comparable to the
original Lox implementation [84].
8.2
OONI
The Open Observatory of Network Interference (OONI) [66]
is a free software project that operates a global measurement
platform aimed at documenting internet censorship while pro-
tecting the safety of its volunteers. The “OONI probe” app
exists as a free mobile and desktop app, available for down-
load from the OONI website and from the Google Play and
Apple App stores. OONI probe works by launching a back-
ground process that periodically attempts to connect to a set
12

// Open registration protocol
muCMZProtocol! {open_registration, ,
UAC: UserAuthCredential { nym_id: J,
age: S, measurement_count: I},
}
// Update protocol
muCMZProtocol!(update,
Old: UserAuthCredential { nym_id: H, age: H,
measurement_count: H},
New: UserAuthCredential { nym_id: H, age: H,
measurement_count: H},
Old.nym_id = New.nym_id,
Old.age = New.age,
Old.measurement_count = New.measurement_count
);
// Submission protocol
muCMZProtocol!(submit<min_age_today, max_age,
min_measurement_count, max_measurement_count,
@DOMAIN, @NYM>,
Old: UserAuthCredential { nym_id: H, age: H,
measurement_count: H},
New: UserAuthCredential { nym_id: H, age: H,
measurement_count: H},
Old.nym_id = New.nym_id,
Old.age = New.age,
New.measurement_count = Old.measurement_count + 1,
NYM = Old.nym_id * DOMAIN,
(min_age_today..=max_age).contains(Old.age),
(min_measurement_count..=max_measurement_count)
.contains(Old.measurement_count)
);
Figure 4: The OONI credential protocols, as implemented in SIGMA-RS
Table 2: Average time (and standard deviation) to create Lox
requests and responses; i.e., to create and verify proofs for the
Lox client and server for a Lox authority with a bridge table
size of 30 bridges.
Protocol
Time (ms)
zkp Library + µCMZ
SIGMA-RS + µCMZ
Client
Server
Client
Server
Native
Wasm
Native
Native
Wasm
Native
Open Invitation
0.53 (0.07) 2.2 (0.9) 0.380 (0.007) 0.360 (0.004)
2.1 (0.7) 0.368 (0.002)
Trust Promotion
2.1 (0.5)
9 (1) 2.792 (0.007)
1.60 (0.08)
7.0 (0.8)
2.5 (0.3)
Trust Migration
1.127 (0.005) 4.9 (0.7) 0.822 (0.006) 1.017 (0.002)
4.9 (0.9) 0.741 (0.006)
Level Up
3.3 (0.3)
13 (1)
2.4 (0.6)
2.44 (0.01) 11.0 (0.9)
1.99 (0.01)
Issue Invite
1.94 (0.01)
7 (1)
1.24 (0.01)
1.7 (0.2)
8 (1)
1.19 (0.02)
Redeem Invite
1.62 (0.02) 6.2 (0.9) 1.131 (0.007) 1.279 (0.007)
6.0 (0.8) 1.033 (0.005)
Check Blockage
0.650 (0.008) 3.0 (0.8)
1.30 (0.01) 0.716 (0.009)
2.9 (0.6) 0.647 (0.003)
Blockage Migration
1.49 (0.06) 5.5 (0.7)
1.1 (0.2) 1.289 (0.006)
6.2 (0.8) 0.922 (0.005)
Update Invite
0.836 (0.008) 3.8 (0.9) 0.525 (0.004)
0.9 (0.4)
4 (1)
0.57 (0.09)
Update Credential
1.117 (0.008) 4.8 (0.6) 0.686 (0.007) 1.054 (0.005)
5.0 (0.7) 0.717 (0.006)
of websites, determined by OONI, then sending the connec-
tivity results back to OONI to be aggregated into connectivity
measurements for specific regions. Unlike traditional systems,
OONI cannot rely on persistent identifiers, accounts, or IP-
based controls, as these could expose users to significant risk.
At the same time, OONI must establish trust in submitted
measurements and mitigate faulty or malicious data. This ten-
sion motivates OONI’s adoption of anonymous credentials: a
cryptographic mechanism that allows probes to prove prop-
erties such as long-term participation or contribution volume
without revealing identity or location, or enabling tracking
across networks. [67]
Evaluation of the credential extension.
Our OONI user-
authentication system equips each Probe installation with a
reusable µCMZ credential whose attributes encode (i) a per-in-
stallation secret nym_id, (ii) an issuance date age (stored as
a Julian day), (iii) a monotone counter measurement_count.
A
new
Probe
registers
via
open_registration,
where the server sets age to “today” and initializes
measurement_count to 0, while nym_id is jointly created
Table 3: Time required for registration, submission, and up-
date operations of the OONI protocol, measured on a Frame-
work 16 laptop with an AMD Ryzen 9 7940HS processor
supporting AVX512 instructions (Native) and an iPhone 16
running iOS 26.2 (iOS).
Protocol
Time (ms)
Client
Server
Native
iOS
Native
Registration
0.33 (0.06)
0.29 (0.03)
0.32 (0.08)
Submit
2.3 (0.2)
2.1 (0.1)
2.3 (0.2)
Update
0.76 (0.07)
0.68 (0.01)
0.6 (0.1)
by the client and server. To upload a measurement, the Probe
runs submit, proving in zero knowledge that it holds a valid
credential, that age and measurement_count lie in coarse
policy ranges, and that the next credential increments the
counter by 1 while preserving nym_id and age. To prevent
cross-network linkability, the Probe derives a network-local
pseudonym NYM = nym_id*DOMAIN, where DOMAIN is a hash
of ooni.org/{CC}/{ASN}; the server receives only the
proof and the 32-byte compressed NYM. Finally, the update
protocol update supports key rotation of the server keys, by
re-issuing the same attributes without revealing them. We
show our SIGMA-RS OONI protocol declarations in Figure 4.
In Table 3 we give an overview of the performance of our
credential system in native code and as an iOS app. We see
that protocol operations complete within a few milliseconds
on both the client and server, with comparable performance
across platforms and no significant overhead introduced by
mobile execution.
13

9
Conclusion
We presented SIGMA-RS, a layered Rust software stack that
makes keyed-verification anonymous credential protocols eas-
ier to specify, implement, and deploy for a wide range of ac-
cess policies. Through case studies drawn from censorship
circumvention systems, specifically Tor’s Lox protocols and
a new anonymous authentication mechanism for OONI, we
demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in simplify-
ing the protocol specification and implementation complexity
while preserving practical efficiency.