Implementing CCZ Gates with Variation of
Gate Teleportation for Quantum
Homomorphic Encryption on NISQ Platform
1st Gia Phat Dang
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0009-0006-4903-0376
22040062@student.westernsydney.edu.au
2nd Weisheng Si
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0000-0002-1239-7880
W.Si@westernsydney.edu.au
3rd Belal Alsinglawi
Zayed University
Abu Dhabi, U.A.E
0000-0003-0316-3641
Belal.AlSinglawi@zu.ac.ae
4th Jim Basilakis
Western Sydney University
Sydney, Australia
0000-0002-7440-1320
J.Basilakis@westernsydney.edu.au
Abstract—While quantum computing technologies are
revolutionising key industries, distributed quantum hard-
ware services are dominated by quantum providers such
as IBM, Google, and AWS. It raises critical data security
concerns across sectors such as banking, defence, and
healthcare. To address this issue, Quantum Homomorphic
Encryption (QHE) has emerged as a solution that
enables computations on encrypted quantum data while
preserving privacy. Despite its promise, deploying QHE
remains challenging due to circuit complexity and the
noise in today’s quantum systems. In this work, we
confront these barriers directly by implementing QHE on
Noisy Intermediate-scale Quantum (NISQ) devices using
the Variation of Gate Teleportation (VGT) scheme. In
particular, we focus on implementing the CCZ gate, a key
non-Clifford gate that makes a quantum gate set universal
when combined with Clifford gates. By leveraging the
techniques from the Classical Quantum Circuit (CQC)-
QHE framework proposed by Ortega et al. in 2025, our
implementation reduces computational cost and improves
resource efficiency. As a result, our approach can support
7 qubits and 14 T-gates in the circuit without large errors,
improving on existing QHE implementations.
Index Terms—Quantum Cloud Computing (QCC),
Quantum Homomorphic Encryption (QHE), Classical
Quantum Circuit (CQC), Noisy Intermediate-scale Quan-
tum (NISQ), Controlled-Controlled-Z (CCZ), Variation
of Gate Teleportation (VGT)
I. INTRODUCTION
The constraints of quantum communication and
hardware, such as quantum memory, have led to the
emergence of hybrid classical and quantum systems
Accepted for publication in the Proceedings of the 2026 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Quantum Control, Computing and Learning
(IEEE qCCL2026) at Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. © 2026
IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future
media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising
or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale
or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted
component of this work in other publications.
known as a Quantum Cloud Computing (QCC) [1]. This
concept enables the remote use of quantum hardware to
analyse large datasets or execute complex algorithms.
In recent years, hybrid quantum-classical cloud systems
have become popular for solving real-world problems,
particularly in sensitive fields such as finance, defence,
and healthcare [2]–[4]. However, the immaturity of
current noisy quantum devices, combined with the
specific requirements of quantum physicists within
classical frameworks, presents challenges in achieving
high accuracy and robust security [5]. In the current
QCC environment, QHE is proposed as a promising
security solution that enables users to outsource the
processing of encrypted data to a quantum server [6].
In the hybrid QCC models, the practicality of QHE
schemes requires no interaction between the client
and the server, a property called non-interactive QHE
algorithms [7].
To effectively develop the practical QHE, called
as Quantum Fully Homomorphic Encryption (QFHE)
schemes, three main conditions must be met: universal
computation, perfect theoretical security, and a compact
decryption process [8]. However, the no-go theorem in
quantum physics renders the simultaneous achievement
of all three conditions impossible, resulting in exponen-
tial overhead for non-interactive QHE algorithms [9]. In
the non-interactive QHE schemes, non-Clifford (T-gate
or triple-qubit gates) operations are the main cause of
algorithmic overhead due to an unexpected phase error.
Since 2015, Broadbent has introduced a foundational
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) evaluation scheme to
handle this error. The approach uses teleportation-
based Bell states to achieve square sublinear decryption
complexity (L2-quasi-compactness), where L is the
number of T-gates, scaling with the square of the
number of non-Clifford (T) gates in the EPR evaluation

circuit [10]. In 2024, Ganjian demonstrated the EPR in a
local computer simulation using IBM-Qiskit, achieving
maximum performance with 1 qubit and 6 T-gates, with
a runtime of over 86 minutes [11].
Back in 2020, Liang proposed an optimal quasi-
compact (L-quasi-compact) QHE framework that lever-
ages a teleportation-based Bell concept, which reduces
the decryption complexity from square sublinear (L2)
to sublinear scaling (L), called Variation of Gate
Teleportation (VGT) (VGT-QHE) [7]. This reduction in
decryption overhead is a key achievement of the VGT
scheme, which is widely applied in many QHE publica-
tions, such as the integration of Grover’s algorithm, the
optimisation of the quantum ciphertext dimension, and
the combination with the recursive Bernstein-Vazirani
framework [12]–[14]. In 2025, Ortega et al. proposed
a semiclassical (Classical Quantum Circuit (CQC)-
QHE) simulation framework (or circuit formalism)
that enables sequential evolution between classical and
quantum stages, permitting intermediate measurements
and reset operations during non-Clifford evaluation and
decryption in VGT [15]. The execution of VGT in
CQC provides a simulation threshold of 20 qubits (6
computational qubits) and a 7-T gate circuit [7], [15].
Despite theoretical advances while progressing from
EPR to VGT evaluation, the NISQ experiment remains
a critical factor for assessing the practicality of QHE,
which has not been addressed in previous contributions
[14].
In discussions of quantum advantage, Controlled-
Controlled-Z (CCZ) is better described as a three-
qubit gate primitive that can enable more resource-
efficient quantum circuits [16]. It belongs to the non-
Clifford group and enables multi-qubit entanglement.
CCZ gates offer computational advantages for universal
quantum computation and play a vital role in various
quantum algorithms. However, the implementation
overhead of CCZ decomposition on quantum hardware
poses significant challenges when combined with the
complexity of the universality QHE evaluation process.
To address this gap, this paper presents a comprehensive
QHE scheme, called (CCZ-QHE), that evaluates the
CCZ gate. Additionally, the hardware implementation
of the CCZ-QHE algorithm can provide insight into the
behaviour of this secure quantum computation protocol
in an NISQ environment, which identifies algorithmic
weaknesses to support further development. This work
provides three primary research contributions:
• We present CCZ-QHE, a scheme that homomor-
phically evaluates the three-qubit CCZ gate on
encrypted quantum states.
• Our approach provides the first hardware valida-
tion of multi-qubit non-Clifford QHE on IBM
Quantum processors, identifying practical fidelity
limits under NISQ conditions.
• We evaluate the effectiveness of Pauli Twirling
(PT) as a Quantum Error Mitigation (QEM)
strategy for CCZ-QHE, establishing conditions
under which error mitigation provides measurable
improvement.
The research paper first describes relevant definitions
and background for the CCZ-QHE scheme in Section
2. Section 3 presents the scheme and operational
procedure for evaluating CCZ gates for QHE. Section
4 presents comprehensive implementation results in
both local simulation and current NISQ mode. Finally,
Sections 5 and 6 discuss the algorithm’s feasibility and
its weaknesses, and point out future research directions.
II. BACKGROUND
A. General QHE architecture
Huang et al. propose that the general QHE architec-
ture begins with the client employing Quantum One-
Time Pad (QOTP) encryption to obscure quantum states
by randomly applying Pauli operators (Xa and Zb) to
their states |ψ⟩[17]. Subsequently, the server performs
a homomorphic evaluation of the encrypted state after
applying Clifford and non-Clifford group gates, thereby
ensuring security by blindly implementing the key-
update mechanism [18].
The key tracking function not only influences the
actual computational operation (|ψ⟩→U |ψ⟩) but also
alters the encryption pattern. Clifford gates H, X, Z,
CNOT provide straightforward deterministic methods
based on the key-update rule [10]. In contrast, non-
Clifford gates introduce unknown phase errors that
affect the accuracy of the decrypted result, due to
Knill’s theorem [19]. To solve the T-gate accumulative
error, the client employs the computed final keys (a′, b′)
to track all key transformations. These keys are used
to decrypt the initial quantum state by inverting the
Pauli operation (Zb′Xa′) [17]. Although the EPR-QHE
scheme can address this unexpected phase error at
each T-gate [10], it imposes exponential overhead in
decryption to O(L2) [11].
B. Gate Teleportation for Non-Clifford Gate’s Evalua-
tion
Since 2020, Liang has introduced a VGT evaluation
method based on the EG[P x] protocol, overcoming the
quadratic-scaling limitation of the EPR-QHE. Liang’s
framework sequentially performs key updating on-
demand computation, acquiring O(n) bits as the num-
ber of keys stored. As a result, it enables reducing
decryption complexity to O(Ln × log2n) calculations
(with L = T-gates and n = qubits), reaching optimal
M-quasi-compactness [7]. Nevertheless, Liang’s VGT
practically faces an exponential overhead at the number
of key values because these keys are required to be pre-
generated during T/T†’s error correction by utilising
the classically controlled S gates [14], [20]. Ortega has
introduced a formalism for Liang’s VGT decryption
concept, called CQC. It allows the client to dynamically
update keys during decryption by combining classical
and quantum operations sequentially [15]. Additionally,
Ortega introduces the semi-classical extension that

enables immediate measurement and reset execution,
reducing the need to pre-generate all possible measure-
ment results and transforming exponential overhead
into O(L) scaling with circuit size. Although the CQC-
QHE algorithm successfully simulates 77 T-gates on
Qiskit’s local simulator, it is not hardware-feasible [15].
C. CCZ Decomposition Feature
Three-qubit gates (such as CCZ or Toffoli/CCX) are
crucial for quantum universal computation, providing
the advantages that distinguish quantum computations
over classical methods [21]. The CCZ gates are popular,
emerging in two major applications: algorithmic devel-
opment (Grover’s algorithm, Quantum Approximation
Optimisation Algorithm (QAOA)) and fault-tolerant
architectures (QEC code-based) [22], [23]. The CCZ
gate acts on one target qubit according to two control
qubits, implementing a phase flip of (−1) on the target
qubit only when both control qubits are in the state
|1⟩. Note that if the target qubit has a state of |0⟩, the
phase flip is meaningless. Thus, we can also say that
the CCZ gate applies a phase flip to the target qubit
only when all three qubits are in the state |1⟩. This
operation can be expressed as:
CCZ |abc⟩= (−1)(a·b·c) |abc⟩,
with a, b, c ∈0, 1.
According to Akahoshi et al., 7 T-gate and Clifford
operations are the decomposition ideal for CCZ gates,
which could affect the QHE computational budget due
to scaling phase errors in homomorphic evaluation.
As a result, evaluating CCZ gates in QHE schemes
may be limited by computational noise introduced
by handling T-gates because of CCZ’s decomposi-
tion feature. Notably, IBM Quantum reports higher
cumulative error when synthesising CCZ gates from
Clifford and T-gates than when using T-gates alone
[24]. For instance, Toffoli gate decomposition requires
6-9 CNOTs and 7 T-gates, yielding 56–63% fidelity,
which is much lower than the 99% associated with
Clifford+T implementations. These findings emphasise
the need for rigorous T-gate management in triple-qubit
gates [25].
D. Error Mitigation on NISQ Hardware
In current-generation NISQ hardware, algorithmic
accuracy is affected by two significant errors: uncon-
trolled interaction between the qubit and the noisy
hardware environment (incoherent) and a predictable
systematic problem that accumulates over successive
operations in the gate implementation (coherent) [26],
[27]. Quantum Error Correction (QEC) requires sub-
stantial resources to dynamically correct errors on
qubits, resulting in significant computational overhead
in current NISQ systems. Given the complexity of Non-
Clifford error in CCZ-QHE, limited NISQ resources
pose a serious challenge to algorithmic feasibility,
especially for the gate teleportation approach, the mid-
circuit measurement method, and the SWAP operation
on each T-gate. In contrast, QEM focuses on post-
processing and circuit-level interventions, which are
better suited to the constraints of quantum hardware.
Among QEM techniques, the PT protocol has become
popular for improving algorithmic accuracy. It targets
the reduction of cumulative physical errors by applying
randomly sampled Pauli conjugations and depolarising
noise, which transform these errors into stochastic
Pauli errors [28]. In QHE, the specific structure of
the PT protocol ensures compatibility with the Pauli
key-updating mechanism of QOTP and manages accu-
mulative errors of non-Clifford groups by converting
them into controllable Pauli noise.
III. RELATED WORK
According to Figure 1, the CQC-QHE section shows
Ortega et al.’s approach as distributed T-gates over
distinct qubits (q1, q2, q3) in the quantum Szegedy walk
circuit. Each T-gate independently activates its teleporta-
tion gadget and the key-updating mechanism (k1, k2, k3
or k4). If a measurement yields incorrect key values, it
only affects the affected qubit’s key pair, leaving other
qubit operations unaffected. In contrast, decomposing
the CCZ gate uses 7 T/T† gates, applied sequentially to
3 qubits and interleaved with CNOTs (CX), illustrated
in CCZ-QHE section of Figure 1. Thus, homomorphic
CCZ evaluation creates a dependency chain across
operations. Measurement results update the encryption
key during T-gate correction and serve as direct inputs
to the next operation on the same qubit. If a single point
within the dependency chain collapses, it will cascade
the rest. As a result, evaluating CCZ in a noisy quantum
hardware environment poses compositional challenges
that affect algorithmic accuracy, as it exposes actual
behaviour and readout errors at each phase.
Based on the above discussion, we identify the
critical factor of CCZ gates in quantum algorithms
across various applications. Moreover, the most recent
QHE-CQC implementation provides a high potential
for evaluating extensive resources. These findings raise
the gap in the practicality of QHE with CCZ evaluation.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Protocol Overview
To bridge the gap, our paper suggests implementing
the CCZ gate within QHE, as described in Algorithm
1. The demonstration outlines four major phases of
the CCZ-QHE, based on Ortega’s work and the CCZ
decomposition guidelines. First, Phase 1 encrypts the
initial quantum state using QOTP. In Phase 2, the server
performs homomorphic evaluation in response to the
client’s requested computation, while a key-updating
process maintains the security of client information.
In Phase 3, responsibility shifts back to the client to
decrypt and recover the initial data, using classical
controlled Bell measurement techniques to reverse key

Fig. 1: Differences between the CQC-QHE and CCZ-QHE schemes
Algorithm 1 QHE-CCZ Protocol
Require: Input state |ψ⟩, gate sequence G
Ensure: Decrypted output state
— Phase 1: Client Encryption (QOTP) —
1: Allocate registers: problem[n], bell[2T], ancilla[3]
2: Prepare |ψ⟩based on circuit type
3: (xk, zk) ←Rand({0, 1}n)
▷Random QOTP keys
4: for i = 0 to n −1 do
5:
if xk[i] = 1 then X(i)
6:
end if;
7:
if zk[i] = 1 then Z(i)
8:
end if
9: end for
— Phase 2: Server Homomorphic Evaluation —
10: idx ←0
11: for gate g ∈G do
12:
if g ∈{H, X, Z, S, CNOT} then Apply g directly
13:
else if g = T on qubit q then
▷Gate teleportation
14:
a ←bell[idx]; b ←bell[idx+1]
15:
H(a); CNOT(a, b); T(a); CNOT(q, a); H(q)
16:
(ra, rb) ←Measure(q, a)
17:
if ra = 1 then X(b)
18:
end if;
19:
if rb = 1 then Z(b)
20:
end if
21:
SWAP(q, b); idx ←idx +2
22:
else if g = CCZ(c1, c2, t) then
▷7-T decomposition
23:
Apply optimal CCZ decomposition with teleportation
24:
end if
25: end for
— Phase 3: Client Decryption —
26: for each shot in memory do
27:
(x, z) ←(xk, zk)
28:
for (gate, qubits) in sequence do
29:
H: swap(x[i], z[i]);
S: z[i] ⊕= x[i]
30:
CNOT: x[t] ⊕= x[c]; z[c] ⊕= z[t]
31:
T: x[i] ⊕= ra; z[i] ⊕= x[i] ⊕rb
32:
end for
33:
mdec[i] ←menc[i] ⊕x[i]
▷Final decryption
34: end for
35: return decrypted measurement outcomes
updates and verify consistency with the homomorphic
evaluation.
B. Resource Requirement
Figure 2 shows that the CCZ-QHE algorithm uses
three types of quantum registers. The quantum resource
register is estimated by the formulation: n + 2T + 3,
where n is the number of data qubits, T is the
number of T-gates, and 3 represents ancilla qubits
needed for CCZ decomposition. Data qubits and T-
gates define computational capability, while the ancilla
qubits support the combined CQC-VGT techniques,
highlighting the overhead from the full CCZ-QHE
circuit.
C. QOTP Algorithm
Similar to the general QHE framework, our blind
quantum cryptographic system utilises QOTP for initial
encryption. In Phase 1 (lines 1 to 9), once quan-
tum register allocation and initial state preparation
are complete, the client generates two random n-bit
keys (xkey, zkey ∈[0, 1]n). These random keys are
subsequently used by QOTP to encrypt the prepared
quantum states, producing the encrypted state
 ˜ψ
E
.
This resulting encrypted state is then transmitted to the
server for homomorphic evaluation.
D. Homomorphic Evaluation Algorithm
Homomorphic evaluation is the most computationally
intensive phase of the QHE-CCZ model, as it enables
computation over encrypted states. In Phase 2 (lines 10-
25), Clifford (H, X, Z, CNOT) and non-Clifford (T and
CCZ) evaluations are performed separately to reduce
computational complexity and optimise key traceability
throughout the evaluation.
The Clifford key updating rules can simplify this
step. However, undesirable phase errors arise from the
interaction between QOTP encryption and non-Clifford
gates (T-gate and CCZ gate) [10]. The algorithm
addresses this by generating a Bell pair using the
VGT-QHE framework (lines 14-15). The server then
applies a T gate to a Bell qubit and executes a
Bell-basis measurement. This includes CNOT, H, and
measurement of both the problem and the Bell qubit.
After measurement, the qubit state collapses, but the
client can still receive a Bell qubit with the applied
T-gate. To identify and correct the phase error, the
server performs conditional Pauli corrections on the
measurement result (ra, rb) (line 16). The server also
entangles the SWAP state back to the problem qubit.
The procedure utilises 24 Bell qubits for 12 T-gates,
with one Bell pair assigned to each T-gate. In addition,

the CCZ decomposition process orchestrates 7 T-gates
and 6 CNOT gates using alternating T/T † layers and
key updates for each CNOT operation (lines 22- 25).
E. QOTP Decryption Algorithm
Phase 3 (lines 28 - 34) illustrates the decryption
process for recovering the evaluated computational
states to their original form. The process begins with
the server providing the encrypted measurement to the
client. With the Clifford group, the client then performs
per-shot decryption using a classical key-updating
procedure provided by the server. On the other hand, the
T-gate requires precise Bell-basis measurement outputs
(ra, rb) per shot; this forms the measurement-extraction
approach, which is crucial for T-gate key updating.
Once the server concludes the key evolution process,
the client receives the encrypted measurement bitstring
(menc) and independently decrypts each shot mdec.
The decryption is performed via bdec[i] = benc[i]⊕x[i],
where ⊕is the XOR operation. Notably, the Zkey is
absent in this step because its global phase impact
has no correspondence to the computational basis
measurement.
Fig. 2: CCZ-QHE Configuration Summary
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The CCZ-QHE algorithm is generated by the Qiskit
IBM Quantum SDK on a MacBook M3 with 36 GB of
RAM. Hardware execution is performed on the IBM
Quantum backend ibm_marrakesh, which has 156
qubits and 1024-shot measurement, including 99.95%
two-qubit gate fidelity and 98% readout fidelity. Figure
2 presents four test configurations in sequence: (1) 5
qubits + CCZ, (2) 7 qubits + CCZ, (3) 7 qubits alone,
and (4) 10 qubits + CCZ gate. Each configuration
applies Clifford gates and a single T gate after each
qubit. The algorithmic circuits are then structured
according to the formula (Total Qubits = n + 2T + 3),
which provides a general structure for universality in
quantum computation.
B. Simulator Accuracy
We use the Qiskit Aer Simulator (with 1024-shot
measurements) to deploy the QHE-CCZ architecture,
TABLE I: Scalability and QEM Effectiveness
Metric
5q+CCZ
7q+CCZ
7q-only
10q+CCZ
Runtime
22.8s
28.3s
11.7s
92.2s
FSim
0.998
0.997
0.999
N/A
FRaw
0.9394
0.9243
0.9652
0.5350
FQEM
0.9523
0.9185
0.9613
Failed
Entropy
0.995
0.982
0.988
0.978
simulating quantum features within a local simula-
tion environment. As shown in table I, simulation
fidelity metrics (Fsim) report an F value above 0.99,
indicating nearly ideal algorithmic correctness. This
high accuracy confirms all algorithm phases, including
the CCZ decomposition (with non-Clifford evaluation)
and the decryption logic. Analysis of the observed
entropy reveals a uniform distribution of values across
quantum states during QHE, confirming the security of
QOTP encryption and decryption and ensuring no state
collapse during T-gate evaluation. The 7q+CCZ test
case has the longest runtime because it uses the most
complex circuit: 7 qubits and a CCZ gate. In contrast,
the 10q+CCZ test case requires 47 qubits according to
the QHE-CCZ resource formula, which requires about
2.25 petabytes of memory (247 × 16 bytes), more than
the local simulation environment can provide.
C. Algorithm Performance on IBM-Hardware
Table I shows the total number of qubits, T-depth,
and running time to measure how the algorithm
scales. Raw fidelity (FRaw - without QEM) and QEM-
corrected fidelity (FQEM) to validate the algorithmic
performance on quantum hardware. For the 7q, 5q-
CCZ, and 7q-CCZ test cases, the raw-fidelity values
indicate algorithmic feasibility, as they remain above
60%. However, in the 10q-CCZ case, fidelity drops
below 60%, indicating the algorithm is impractical.
For example, raw fidelity drops from F = 0.9652
(7q-only) to F = 0.5350 (10q+CCZ). This decrease
indicates that increasing the T-gate count, particularly
in CCZ-decomposed cases, reduces fidelity more than
adding qubits alone. Moreover, the increase in resources
is 43% more qubits and 21% more T-gates as the
problem size grows from 5 to 10 qubits. This result
matches the expected scaling of quantum resources
for the CCZ-QHE algorithm. Comparing 5q+CCZ (32
total qubits, F = 0.9394) to 7q-only (24 total qubits,
F = 0.9652) shows that 5q+CCZ, which has more
qubits and a higher T-gate count, exhibits lower fidelity.
Thus, differences in T-gate and problem qubit scaling
have distinct effects on fidelity, with non-Clifford gates
proving most detrimental. Applying the PT method,
5q+CCZ shows a 1.4% gain in fidelity. In contrast,
both 7-qubit tests lose some accuracy, with a 0.6%
drop (0.9243 to 0.9185) for 7q+CCZ and a 0.4% drop
(0.9652 to 0.9613) for 7q-only. The 10-qubit case does
not improve with PT, giving an ‘IBM Internal Compiler
Error 6053’.

TABLE II: Error Source Decomposition
Error Source
5q+CCZ
7q+CCZ
7q-only
10q+CCZ
Total error
4.8%
7.6%
3.5%
46.5%
CX gate count
∼180
∼250
∼120
∼600
Gate error est.
3.2%
4.8%
2.1%
>15%
Measurement count
∼50
∼70
∼35
∼120
Meas. error est.
1.5%
2.1%
0.9%
>5%
SWAP operations
∼20
∼35
∼15
∼100
Transp. error est.
0.8%
1.2%
0.5%
>3%
D. Error Decomposition and Algorithmic Noise Mech-
anism
Table II summarises the essential noise analysis
across three major sources. Firstly, the total gate errors
highlight the QEM fidelity failure rate relative to the
ideal correctness, with the highest failure rate observed
in the 10q+CCZ case. Secondly, for the hardware
transpilation circuit, error component metrics include
CX gate count (IBM Quantum’s transpilation), which
shows over 600 additional gates after the transpilation
at 10q+CCZ and only 120 additional gates at 7q-only.
Finally, measurement error and the SWAP operation
facilitate the Bell measurement used to evaluate the
T-gate. Consistent with the other two noise analysis
metrics, the T-gate error values show increases in
the SWAP operation and measured error, respectively,
from 0.8% to over 3% and from 1.5% to over 5%.
This experiment yields a significant improvement in
decomposed error over the 10q configuration.
VI. DISCUSSION
This paper’s experimental findings clarify the impact
of T-gate dominance on algorithmic practicality, iden-
tify error factors in NISQ hardware implementation,
and present a viable strategy to bridge the gap between
simulation and implementation.
A. Impact of T-gate on the algorithm’s practical thresh-
old
First, Bell-pair preparation (via CX gates), mid-
circuit measurement, and SWAP operations introduce
three error sources that occur concurrently with each
T-gate correction. The accumulation of 14 to 17 T-gates
results in an exponential increase in key-update depen-
dency chains, effectively degrading high-fidelity results
into unusable QHE outputs. Furthermore, additional
T-gates increase SWAP and CX gate counts, indicating
a compounded effect driven by decoherence, circuit
complexity, depth, and routing overhead. Consequently,
the T-gate constitutes the primary bottleneck and
establishes a practical threshold beyond which fidelity
drops below acceptable levels. Our experiments indicate
this threshold lies between 7 and 14 T-gates. These
practical threshold metrics—combining T-gate count,
problem qubits count, and hardware topology—serve as
a proof of concept for real-world quantum computation
operating within observed fidelity limits. Given the
failure of the 10-qubit CCZ configuration, several
enhancement strategies at different levels merit consid-
eration: algorithm-level optimisations (e.g., reducing
circuit complexity through parallelised T-gate execu-
tion), protocol-level innovations (e.g., employing T-gate
magic states to improve Bell-pair measurement fidelity),
and QEM techniques.
B. Algorithmic Feasibility Boundary
The CCZ-QHE framework handles small quantum
circuits with up to 14 T-gates, including a 3-qubit
Grover search (2 CCZ gates, 14 T-gates) and 2-layer
nonlinear quantum classifiers. However, this threshold
serves only as a proof of concept; real-world algorithms
requiring multiple Grover iterations or 3-qubit gate
rounds often exceed this limit. Extending the threshold
to 30–40 T-gates is essential for practical applications.
Regarding error mitigation,QEM methods such as PT
introduce additional gates into the circuit but provide
an enhancement only for the smallest (5-qubit + CCZ)
configuration, which explains the observed scaling
challenges on IBM Quantum hardware.
C. Comparison of the experiment result among CCZ-
QHE scheme to other QHE variant
Table III illustrates the distinction between our
implementation and earlier QHE papers, which use four
majority metrics. In terms of computational resources,
our CCZ-QHE implementation has the largest number
of qubits, with 7. However, the universality of non-
Clifford gates is lower than that of Ortega et al.’s
work. This limited number of T/T † is due to the noisy
environment of quantum hardware compared with the
ideal measurement environment of the CQC installation.
Nevertheless, our implementation demonstrates the
feasibility and meaningful progress of QHE algorithms
for NISQ systems, highlighting their practical value
for advancing secure quantum computation.
D. Security Under NISQ hardware
The local simulation environment of the CCZ-QHE
scheme achieves near-ideal fidelity and maintains high-
entropy measurement metrics, thereby strengthening
the security of the CCZ-QHE protocol by leveraging
the information-theoretic security of QOTP. The CCZ-
QHE framework provides perfect security by building
on Liang’s scheme and leveraging a maximally mixed
state via QOTP encryption. The extension via the
CCZ gate maintains this security by fully decomposing
into T/T † and the Clifford group. While Liang’s
analysis and Ortega et al.’s framework assume ideal
conditions, our hardware entropy measurements (0.982-
0.995) confirm that QOTP encryption remains sound
on IBM Quantum devices, as the predominantly depo-
larising noise channels (reinforced by PT converting
coherent errors into stochastic Pauli errors) map states
toward a maximally mixed state, preserving rather than
compromising ciphertext randomness.
On the client side, the security concern shifts to
decryption correctness: the 5q+CCZ and 7q+CCZ

TABLE III: Comparison between performance of CCZ-QHE implementation with other QHE variants
Metric
Ganjian et al. [11]
Fern´andez et al. [13]
Ortega et al. [15]
This Work (QHE-CCZ)
Number of Qubits
1 (Qiskit sim.)
3 (Qiskit sim.)
Up to 6 (Qiskit sim.)
5, 7, 10 (IBM Quantum hardware)
Non-Clifford Gate
Scope
T/T † only
Toffoli
MCX
CCZ
Max T -gates Val-
idated
6 (sim.)
7 (sim.)
∼77 (sim.)
17 on hardware (5q:12, 7q:7–14,
10q:17)
Execution
Platform
Qiskit simulation
Qiskit simulation
Qiskit simulation
IBM Quantum
configurations maintain acceptable fidelities (FRaw =
0.9394, 0.9243; FQEM = 0.9523, 0.9185), but degra-
dation to FRaw = 0.5350 at 10q+CCZ reveals that
beyond the 14 T-gate threshold, error accumulation
undermines utility while confidentiality is preserved.
Implementing QHE on hybrid cloud platforms requires
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) integration to
safeguard QOTP-encrypted keys, shifting the security
model from information-theoretic to semantic security
(IND-CPA) under lattice-based assumptions.
VII. CONCLUSION
Integrating QHE protocols with broader quantum
algorithms remains challenging, particularly in the
NISQ era, where protocols must simultaneously satisfy
cryptographic correctness and circuit-level resource
efficiency. Motivated by the central role of the CCZ
gate in many quantum algorithms, we implemented
and evaluated a CCZ-QHE scheme on IBM quantum
hardware, identifying a practical operating threshold
of 7 qubits and 14 T gates. Experimental results high-
light stochastic noise effects in current NISQ devices
and indicate that T-gate cost dominates performance
degradation, compounded by CX(CNOTs) overhead,
intermediate measurements, and SWAP operations.
Future work should focus on extending qubit and T-gate
thresholds through improved compilation, key-update
optimisation, and error-aware protocol design. This
work establishes a practical baseline for CCZ-enabled
QHE under realistic NISQ constraints and provides
an evidence-based foundation for scalable, hardware-
tailored quantum cryptographic protocols.