Efficient Bootstrapping of Matrices in FHE
Rostin Shokri and Nektarios Georgios Tsoutsos
University of Delaware
{rostinsh, tsoutsos}@udel.edu
Abstract. In recent years, Fully Homomorphic encryption (FHE) has
proven to be a practical solution to various privacy preserving applica-
tions such as neural network inference, private information retrieval, and
genome analysis. Industries have started to utilize FHE to enable pri-
vate computation of user’s sensitive data, to protect user privacy. Out
of all FHE applications, deep learning inference has been the most pop-
ular field of research among FHE researchers and practitioners, as it is
incredibly challenging to do encrypted inference under FHE.
Matrix multiplication is the fundamental operation that is used in deep
learning, and is notoriously challenging to implement efficiently in FHE.
Many works utilize CKKS, SOTA FHE scheme for deep learning. They
introduce novel encoding strategies to enable matrix multiplication, but
they require very large evaluation keys, high execution time, and ma-
trix dimension limitations. Fortunately, a recent FHE scheme proposed
by Gentry and Lee, called the GL scheme, supports matrix multiplica-
tion as a native operation, whilst supporting every operation in CKKS.
While very promising, the unique ring structure of the scheme requires
prime NTT transforms, 3D DFT encoding of the message, which are not
researched enough. Additionally, there is no efficient bootstrapping algo-
rithm introduced by this scheme, as bootstrapping is needed to enable
deep computations that is required by large deep learning models. In this
work, we introduce the first unique and efficient bootstrapping algorithm
of the GL scheme.
Keywords: CKKS · Fully Homomorphic Encryption · Matrix-Native Boot-
strapping · Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning · Private Inference
1
Introduction
Privacy-preserving machine learning [18,27,29] has received sustained attention
in recent years, driven by the widespread deployment of machine learning as a
service (MLaaS) [26] and the need to protect sensitive user data during infer-
ence. Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) [13] is one of the most compelling
cryptographic approaches for this setting, as it enables computation directly on
encrypted data without requiring decryption by the service provider. In a typical
private inference workflow, a client encrypts its input under its secret key, the

server evaluates the model over ciphertexts, and the client decrypts the predic-
tion locally. This model offers strong confidentiality guarantees, but its practi-
cality depends critically on the efficiency of the underlying FHE scheme and, in
particular, on the cost of ciphertext refresh operation call bootstrapping [14].
A fundamental obstacle in all FHE schemes is noise growth. To ensure se-
curity, ciphertexts contain structured noise, and this noise increases with every
homomorphic operation. After sufficiently deep computation, the accumulated
noise makes decryption unreliable unless the ciphertext is refreshed. Bootstrap-
ping addresses this problem by homomorphically evaluating the decryption cir-
cuit and producing a new ciphertext with reduced noise and renewed compu-
tational depth. As a result, bootstrapping is a central building block for deep
homomorphic workloads, including modern neural networks with many layers,
nonlinearities, and repeated linear algebra operations. As hardware accelerators
and FHE algorithms continue to improve, enabling deeper and more expressive
encrypted models, the cost of bootstrapping increasingly determines end-to-end
system performance.
Most practical FHE-based private inference (PI) systems [7,21,30] today rely
on the CKKS scheme [9], which is widely considered to be the SOTA FHE scheme
for PI because it supports approximate arithmetic over real and complex num-
bers and provides high throughput through packed SIMD-style computation.
Accordingly, a large body of work has focused on improving CKKS bootstrap-
ping [3,5], exploring tradeoffs among multiplicative depth, latency, precision, and
parallelism. However, CKKS remains fundamentally a vector-oriented scheme.
Matrix multiplication must still be realized through nontrivial packing layouts,
rotations, and sequences of element wise operations [1, 22]. Since matrix mul-
tiplication is the dominant kernel in deep learning, this mismatch between the
algebra of the scheme and the structure of the workload continues to impose
substantial overhead.
The recently proposed GL scheme [15] introduces a significantly different
design point. Instead of treating matrix multiplication as a derived operation
over vector slots, GL natively supports encrypted matrix arithmetic through a
multivariate ring construction and a Gaussian-integer viewpoint, reducing ho-
momorphic matrix multiplication to structured plaintext modular matrix mul-
tiplications [15]. This feature makes GL particularly attractive from a systems
and hardware perspective. Because the dominant encrypted linear algebra is re-
duced to plaintext modular matrix multiplication, GL is a natural candidate for
GPU acceleration and future specialized FHE hardware. Its arithmetic aligns
well with highly optimized dense linear algebra kernels and with massively par-
allel architectures equipped with matrix-oriented compute units. Consequently,
GL has the potential to serve as a strong foundation for high-throughput private
inference systems.
Despite this promise, GL currently lacks an efficient and concrete bootstrap-
ping procedure. While the original GL paper notes that the scheme can in prin-
ciple be combined with existing bootstrapping methods, no efficient realization
specialized to GL is currently available [15]. This gap is critical. Without boot-
2

strapping, GL remains restricted to shallow computations, which severely limits
its practical use in deep private inference workloads where repeated ciphertext
refresh is unavoidable. In effect, the absence of bootstrapping is the main bar-
rier preventing GL from becoming a practical alternative to CKKS in encrypted
deep learning.
Designing bootstrapping for GL is substantially more challenging than sim-
ply transplanting a CKKS construction. The difficulty is algebraic, not merely
implementation-wise. CKKS bootstrapping is built around a one-dimensional
power-of-two cyclotomic ring, where slot/coefficient transforms, automorphisms,
and masking structures are well understood. In contrast, a GL ciphertext slice
lives in a non-power-of-two (X, W) ring whose structure is intrinsically multivari-
ate. This changes the semantics of rotations, the organization of coefficients, and
the action of sparse secret-key monomials during the decryption circuit. Con-
sequently, standard CKKS bootstrapping techniques do not transfer directly.
Any practical GL bootstrapping algorithm must therefore be derived from the
slice algebra itself rather than obtained by a straightforward reuse of CKKS
machinery.
In this work, we bridge this gap by introducing, to the best of our knowledge,
the first efficient bootstrapping framework for the GL scheme. Our approach
adapts recent shallow bootstrapping ideas from [6] to the GL setting while pre-
serving the structural advantages that make GL attractive in the first place.
Rather than flattening the GL ciphertext into a conventional one-dimensional
object, we develop a slice-aware construction that works directly with the (X, W)
ring structure. This viewpoint is essential both for correctness and for efficiency:
it enables us to align the decryption circuit with the native GL algebra, and
retain a path toward practical hardware acceleration.
More broadly, this work connects two directions that have so far developed
largely independently: recent advances in shallow and highly parallelizable boot-
strapping, and emerging matrix-native FHE schemes designed for efficient linear
algebra and hardware acceleration. We argue that this connection is necessary
for the next generation of privacy-preserving deep learning systems. Without
efficient bootstrapping, matrix-native schemes cannot support deep workloads;
without matrix-native schemes, substantial performance is lost in mapping in-
herently matrix-based computations into vector-oriented encrypted arithmetic.
Our goal is to unify these directions and provide the algorithmic foundation
needed to make GL practical for encrypted inference.
Our contributions are as follows:
– We formulate, to the best of our knowledge, the first concrete bootstrapping
framework for the GL scheme, addressing a central open gap between the
promising matrix-native computation model of GL and its practical deploy-
ment in deep private inference.
– We show that bootstrapping GL requires a slice-aware treatment of the non-
power-of-two (X, W) ring structure, and we identify why a direct reuse of
standard CKKS bootstrapping techniques is insufficient in this setting.
3

– We develop a new GL slice bootstrapping procedure that adapts shallow
decryption-in-the-exponent ideas to the GL algebra.
– We provide the first step toward making GL a practical foundation for deep
encrypted inference, thereby bridging the current gap between matrix-native
FHE design and bootstrapped end-to-end private machine learning systems.
Roadmap: The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we re-
view the necessary background on CKKS, the GL scheme, and existing CKKS
bootstrapping methods. In Section 3, we present our GL slice-wise SHIP boot-
strapping framework, including our novel partial S2C algorithm, and our unique
and efficient half SHIP bootstrapping for a GL slice. Section 4 reports our exper-
imental evaluation and comparisons against CKKS baselines. Section 5 discusses
prior work on homomorphic matrix arithmetic and bootstrapping, and positions
our contribution relative to CKKS bootstrapping algorithms, and other less us-
able FHE matrix schemes. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
Background
In this section, we briefly review the CKKS and GL schemes and summarize the
main paradigms for bootstrapping CKKS ciphertexts. We then highlight why
bootstrapping the GL scheme is substantially more challenging than directly
reusing existing CKKS constructions.
2.1
CKKS and GL Background
CKKS The CKKS scheme is an RLWE-based fully homomorphic encryption
scheme for approximate arithmetic over real and complex numbers. It is typically
instantiated over the power-of-two cyclotomic ring
Rq = Zq[X]/(XN + 1),
where N is a power of two and q is the ciphertext modulus. Through the canonical
embedding, a plaintext polynomial can encode N/2 complex values, enabling
SIMD-style packed computation. To represent real or complex values with high
precision, CKKS uses a scaling factor ∆, so that plaintext values are mapped to
approximate ring elements.
A CKKS ciphertext has the usual RLWE form (b, a), and decryption satisfies
b + as ≈m,
where s is the secret key and m is the encoded plaintext. Homomorphic addition
is component-wise, while homomorphic multiplication produces a higher-degree
ciphertext under the enlarged secret-key basis (1, s, s2). Therefore, multiplication
must be followed by relinearization, which is a form of key switching that returns
the ciphertext to the standard two-component form. In addition, multiplication
increases the effective scale, so CKKS uses rescaling to reduce the modulus and
bring the scale back under control. These operations make CKKS especially well
suited for approximate numerical workloads such as neural network inference,
where additions and multiplications dominate.
4

GL scheme The Gentry–Lee (GL) scheme is a recently proposed RLWE-based
FHE construction designed for native matrix arithmetic. Instead of working in
a univariate cyclotomic ring and treating matrices as packed vectors, GL uses a
multivariate Gaussian-integer ring
R′
q = Zq[i][X, Y, W]/(Xn −i, Y n −i, Φp(W)),
while the secret key is sampled from the smaller ring
Rq = Zq[i][X, W]/(Xn −i, Φp(W)).
Under this construction, one plaintext polynomial encodes φ(p) matrices of size
n × n by evaluation at roots of unity:
m(ζj, ζk, ηℓ) = M (ℓ)
j,k,
where ζj, ζk are 4n-th roots of unity associated with the X- and Y -axes, and ηℓ
is a p-th root of unity associated with the W-axis. This yields a native matrix
encoding in which row and column structure are represented directly in the
plaintext algebra. Because the W-axis has length φ(p), which is generally not
a power of two, its transform cannot use the standard radix-2 Cooley–Tukey
pipeline and instead must rely on a prime-length transform such as Rader’s
algorithm [25].
For a simple toy example, if n = 2 and φ(p) = 2 (which means p = 3), then
a single GL plaintext can encode 2 separate 2 × 2 complex matrices at once.
In this case, each Y -slice is an (X, W)-ciphertext with RLWE ring dimension
2nφ(p) = 8, so one GL ciphertext can be viewed as two slice ciphertexts, each
carrying part of the batched matrix data.
Supported homomorphic operations in GL Beyond ciphertext–ciphertext matrix
multiplication, the GL scheme naturally supports a broad set of matrix opera-
tions through its multivariate ring structure [15]. In particular:
– Plaintext–ciphertext matrix multiplication: a ciphertext can be mul-
tiplied by a plaintext matrix directly through the trace-based matrix mul-
tiplication primitive; with transposed encoding, the same mechanism also
supports left multiplication by a plaintext matrix.
– Addition: ciphertext addition is component-wise and directly corresponds
to matrix addition in the encoded domain.
– Hadamard multiplication: entrywise matrix multiplication is realized by
ordinary ciphertext multiplication, followed by relinearization.
– Conjugation: complex conjugation of each encoded matrix is implemented
by a ring automorphism together with key switching.
– Row rotation: cyclic row shifts inside each encrypted matrix are induced
by automorphisms on the X-variable, followed by key switching.
– Column rotation: cyclic column shifts are induced by automorphisms on
the Y -variable; since the secret key is independent of Y , this operation does
not require key switching.
5

– Inter-matrix rotation: rotations across the batched matrices are induced
by automorphisms on the W-variable and correspond to cyclic shifts along
the batch dimension.
– Transpose: matrix transposition is implemented by permuting the X- and
Y -variables, followed by key switching.
– Conjugate transpose: Hermitian transposition is obtained through a com-
bined automorphism on X, Y , and W, together with key switching.
These operations are important because they show that GL is not only a
scheme for fast encrypted matrix multiplication, but a broader matrix-native
homomorphic computation model. As noted in the GL paper, the resulting ci-
phertext structure can also be combined with existing RLWE-based bootstrap-
ping techniques by applying bootstrapping independently to each Y -slice [15].
A major advantage of GL is that matrix operations arise naturally from
the ring structure. Matrix addition and Hadamard multiplication correspond to
direct ring operations, while row and column transformations can be expressed
through ring automorphisms. Most importantly, encrypted matrix multiplication
is realized through a homomorphic trace construction using an auxiliary vari-
able, reducing ciphertext-ciphertext matrix multiplication to four matrix mul-
tiplications of ciphertext components followed by key switching. Therefore, GL
avoids repeated slot-to-coefficient and coefficient-to-slot conversions and provides
a much more natural algebraic substrate for matrix-heavy workloads.
Why GL is different from CKKS for bootstrapping Although GL can be viewed
as CKKS-like in the sense that it supports approximate arithmetic and is based
on RLWE, its internal algebra is fundamentally different from standard CKKS.
In CKKS, bootstrapping is designed around a one-dimensional power-of-two cy-
clotomic ring, where coefficient/slot transforms, automorphisms, and masking
structures are well understood. In contrast, a GL ciphertext slice lives in a non-
power-of-two (X, W) ring over Zq[i], and the decryption circuit must account for
multivariate structure, Gaussian-integer coefficients, and the interaction between
the X- and W-axes. Consequently, standard CKKS bootstrapping methods do
not transfer directly. This algebraic mismatch is precisely what makes GL boot-
strapping both challenging and interesting.
2.2
CKKS Bootstrapping Background
Bootstrapping is the operation that refreshes a ciphertext by reducing its noise
and restoring its available modulus budget. For CKKS, the goal is to trans-
form a low-level ciphertext back into a high-level ciphertext that encrypts (ap-
proximately) the same plaintext. Existing CKKS bootstrapping methods can be
broadly divided into two families.
ModRaise + approximate modular reduction The classical CKKS bootstrapping
approach first applies ModRaise to lift a ciphertext from modulus q to a larger
modulus Q. After this operation, the ciphertext decrypts to a value of the form
m + kq,
6

where m is the target plaintext and kq is an unwanted multiple of the old mod-
ulus. The central challenge is therefore to remove the kq term homomorphically.
Classical CKKS bootstrapping solves this by evaluating an approximate mod-
ular reduction map, usually denoted EvalMod, through polynomial approxima-
tion. In practice, this is implemented by transforming the ciphertext between
coefficient and slot representations, applying a polynomial approximation to a
periodic function related to modular reduction, and then transforming back.
This paradigm underlies the original CKKS bootstrapping algorithm [5] and
many subsequent refinements [17, 28]. Improvements in this line of work typi-
cally focus on reducing multiplicative depth, improving approximation quality,
optimizing the coefficient-to-slot and slot-to-coefficient transforms, or exploiting
sparse-secret variants to reduce latency and failure probability.
Homomorphic evaluation of the decryption equation A more recent line of work
departs from the classical EvalMod viewpoint and instead refreshes a cipher-
text by more directly homomorphically evaluating a decryption-style relation.
Rather than approximating modular reduction through sine or Chebyshev-based
constructions, these methods embed the relevant low-level coefficients into roots
of unity and recover the message through a decryption-in-the-exponent style
computation. This viewpoint can substantially reduce multiplicative depth and
improve parallelism.
Representative works in this family include SHIP [6] and SPRU [11]. These
approaches are especially attractive when low depth and implementation effi-
ciency are critical, since they avoid some of the most expensive components
of the classical CKKS bootstrapping pipeline. In particular, SHIP replaces the
usual coefficient-to-slot (C2S) stage with a shallower decryption-oriented con-
struction and relies primarily on the S2C. Instead of the ModRaise and C2S
operation, SHIP has an plaintext encoding step, where they encode the polyno-
mial components of the ciphertext, and bootstrap using masked-column selection
and blind-rotation style primitives.
Bootstrapping viewpoint adopted in this work The bootstrapping method devel-
oped in this paper follows the SHIP-style family of constructions. Concretely,
our approach adopts the decryption-in-the-exponent viewpoint and leverages
S2C-style transformations while avoiding the classical C2S-centered EvalMod
pipeline. This choice is motivated by two considerations. First, SHIP provides
an efficient and shallow bootstrapping framework that is better aligned with the
low-depth requirements of practical implementations. Second, its decryption-
oriented structure offers a promising starting point for adapting bootstrapping
to the nonstandard slice algebra of the GL scheme.
2.3
Threat Model
We consider the standard honest-but-curious private inference setting. A client
encrypts its input under its own private secret key and sends the ciphertexts to an
untrusted server, which holds the public FHE keys and performs homomorphic
7

evaluation, such as bootstrapping, without learning the client’s plaintext input
or output. The server is assumed to follow the prescribed protocol correctly,
but may attempt to infer information from the ciphertexts, evaluation keys, and
intermediate bootstrapping material it observes.
CKKS and GL achieve IND-CPA security by instantiating encryption as an
RLWE encryption problem: a ciphertext is a noisy affine masking of the plain-
text under a secret ring element, so distinguishing encryptions of two chosen
messages is computationally hard assuming RLWE is hard over the underlying
ring. In CKKS this ring is the standard cyclotomic RLWE ring, while in GL the
multivariate Gaussian-integer construction is chosen so that it remains reducible
to standard RLWE hardness over an appropriate cyclotomic ring. We do not con-
sider the stronger IND-CPAD [19] setting, which for approximate schemes such
as CKKS and GL typically requires additional countermeasures such as noise
flooding [20], although such defenses can be incorporated in a straightforward
manner if needed.
3
Framework
3.1
Our Novel Bootstrapping Algorithm
A major advantage of our bootstrapping algorithm is that it requires substan-
tially fewer rotation keys than its CKKS counterpart. In standard CKKS boot-
strapping, coefficient/slot transforms are implemented through large families of
slot rotations and the corresponding evaluation keys, which creates significant
memory overhead for key generation, communication, and storage. In contrast,
our GL bootstrapping pipeline exploits the native matrix structure of the scheme.
In particular, the X-axis inversion is realized through matrix multiplication and
conjugate-transpose operations, while the slice-wise SHIP phase restricts hidden
selection to the X-axis only. Thus, the number of required key-switched oper-
ations is greatly reduced, which lowers both memory footprint and execution
time.
Another important benefit of our construction is its flexibility. After the
GL ciphertext is refreshed, the computation does not need to remain in a sin-
gle homomorphic representation. Depending on the structure of the remaining
program, the refreshed ciphertext can continue either in the GL encoding, to
exploit native encrypted matrix arithmetic, or in a CKKS-style representation,
if subsequent vector-oriented SIMD operations are more efficient. This flexibility
is especially useful for large compiler-driven homomorphic programs, where an
optimizer can choose when to remain in GL and when to switch encodings to
minimize total evaluation cost.
Slots-to-Coeffs Operation in GL In the GL scheme, a plaintext polynomial
m(X, Y, W) ∈R′
q = Zq[i][X, Y, W]/⟨Xn −i, Y n −i, Φp(W)⟩
8

encodes φ(p) matrices of size n × n through the evaluation rule
m(ζj, ζk, ηℓ) = M (ℓ)
j,k,
j, k ∈[0, n), ℓ∈[0, φ(p)).
Thus, the plaintext is naturally in a three-dimensional slot domain along the X,
Y , and W axes.
A key structural fact of the GL scheme is that the secret key belongs to the
smaller ring
Rq = Zq[i][X, W]/⟨Xn −i, Φp(W)⟩,
so it is independent of Y . Therefore, if we write
m(X, Y, W) =
n−1
X
y=0
my(X, W)Y y,
then the ciphertext may be viewed as n RLWE ciphertexts over the inner (X, W)-
ring, one for each Y -slice. In other words, the Y -axis acts as an outer batching
index, while each slice is an (X, W) ciphertext.
Why the Y -DFT does not need to be inverted homomorphically. Our goal is not to
produce a fully coefficient-encoded element of R′
q. Instead, the goal is to prepare
the ciphertext for slice-wise bootstrapping by converting each (X, W) slice from
slot form back to coefficient form. Since bootstrapping is applied independently
to each Y -coefficient ciphertext, there is no need to homomorphically undo the
Y -axis transform. The Y -axis can remain as the outer slice index throughout
preprocessing.
Accordingly, the S2C procedure in our GL pipeline inverts only the X- and
W-axis transforms:
xyw −→yw only −→y only.
After this process, the message is coefficient-encoded in X and W, while Y still
indexes the family of slices. This is precisely the representation required for our
slice-wise SHIP-style bootstrapping procedure.
State interpretation. We use the following message-encoding states:
– xyw: the message remains in slot form along all three axes;
– yw only: the X-axis transform has been removed, while Y and W remain in
slot form;
– y only: both the X- and W-axis transforms have been removed, while Y
remains as the outer slice index.
Overall GL S2C pipeline Let C be a GL ciphertext in the standard three-axis
slot encoding. The preprocessing stage is
S2CGL(C) = WInv
 XInv(C)

.
9

Algorithm 1 Matrix-multiplication-based X-axis inversion
Require: A GL ciphertext C in state xyw
Require: Precomputed plaintext transform PX
Ensure: A ciphertext C in state yw only
1: C ←ConjTranspose(C)
2: C ←MatMul(C, PX)
3: C ←ConjTranspose(C)
4: C ←Rescale(C)
5: Update the message state from xyw to yw only
6: return C
The first stage removes the X-axis transform by reusing the GL plaintext-
ciphertext matrix multiplication primitive. The second stage removes the W-axis
transform through a diagonal decomposition accelerated with a baby-step/giant-
step strategy. Each stage is followed by a rescale, so the implementation starts
from a level-2 ciphertext and ends at level 0.
Algorithm 1 Overview. For each fixed W-slot, the payload may be viewed as
an n × n matrix over the (X, Y ) indices. The inverse X-axis transform is a
linear transform acting on one matrix dimension. Since GL already provides
a plaintext-ciphertext matrix multiplication primitive, this transform can be
realized by multiplying with a fixed plaintext matrix. The conjugate-transpose
trick is used only to express the required left action through the available right-
multiplication primitive.
Algorithm 2 Overview. The inverse W-transform is a linear transform across
the batched matrix index. A diagonal decomposition expresses this transform as
a sum of rotated ciphertexts, each multiplied by a W-diagonal plaintext. The
BSGS decomposition groups these terms into blocks. Inside each block, only the
short baby rotations are materialized explicitly, while the large giant rotation is
applied once to the full block contribution. In the implementation, the expensive
decomposition work is hoisted and reused across several terms.
Final output of GL S2C Combining the two stages gives
xyw
XInv
−−−−→yw only
WInv
−−−−→y only.
Thus, the final ciphertext is coefficient-encoded in the inner variables X and W,
while Y remains the outer slicing dimension. This is why a separate homomorphic
inversion of the Y -DFT is unnecessary in our GL bootstrapping pipeline.
GL Slice SHIP Half-Bootstrapping After the S2C preprocessing, the ci-
phertext is in state y only. At this point, we first switch the ciphertext from the
primary secret key to the sparse low-level bootstrapping secret. This sparse key
is the one used by the SHIP-style decryption-in-the-exponent phase. We then
10

Algorithm 2 BSGS-based W-axis inversion
Require: A GL ciphertext C in state yw only
Require: Precomputed W-diagonal plaintexts {Dt}φ(p)−1
t=0
Require: Baby-step size m
Ensure: A ciphertext A in state y only
1: Convert C to a representation where the W-axis is explicit in evaluation form
2: G ←
l
φ(p)
m
m
3: for j = 0 to m −1 do
4:
Cj ←ρj
W (C)
5: end for
6: A ←0
7: for g = 0 to G −1 do
8:
Tg ←0
9:
for each valid t ∈{gm, . . . , min(φ(p) −1, gm + m −1)} do
10:
j ←t −gm
11:
Tg ←Tg + Cj ⊙ρ−gm
W
(Dt)
12:
end for
13:
A ←A + ρgm
W (Tg)
14: end for
15: A ←Rescale(A)
16: Update the message state from yw only to y only
17: return A
split the ciphertext into Y -slices and bootstrap each slice independently in the
inner (X, W)-ring.
For one slice, let the ciphertext be (B(X, W), A(X, W)). Since the slice lives
in the Gaussian-integer ring Zq[i][X, W]/⟨Xn −i, Φp(W)⟩, we write
A = A0 + iA1,
B = B0 + iB1,
with A0, A1, B0, B1 in the real coefficient ring. The sparse slice secret has mono-
mials of the form
sr(X, W) = σrXαrW βr,
σr ∈{±1}.
This induces two real coefficient branches:
M0 = B0 + A0s,
M1 = B1 + A1s.
Rather than attempting to apply SHIP directly to Gaussian exponents, we boot-
strap these two real branches separately and recombine them only at the end.
This preserves the real-valued scalar reduction framework of SHIP while respect-
ing the GL slice algebra.
For efficiency, we keep the W-axis in the coefficient basis. Multiplication by
W β is represented by a real φ(p) × φ(p) matrix Bβ, so the hidden W-part of
each sparse secret monomial becomes an ordinary linear transform on the W-
coefficient vector. This allows the hidden selection problem to remain on the
11

X-axis only. We then apply a SHIP-style hybrid masked-column procedure: a
coarse X-selection is performed by encrypted masked columns, while the fine
X-residue is handled by blind rotation through HMuxRot. For efficiency, our
implementation uses the gadget-decomposed HMuxRot structure corresponding
to Algorithm 5 in SHIP.
To further reduce the number of candidate masked columns, we adopt SHIP’s
sparse-secret spacing assumption on the flattened slice-monomial index
t = φ(p)α + β.
This yields a public interval for each sparse nonzero, which is then projected
to a smaller admissible X-window. The masked-column bank is generated only
for candidate (j1, β) pairs consistent with that public interval. In this way, the
algorithm preserves the same sparse-secret support model as SHIP while avoiding
a full search over all X-positions.
Algorithm 3 Overview. The sparse secret key is first introduced only at the low-
est level, in the same spirit as sparse-secret bootstrapping methods for CKKS.
Each Y -slice is then processed independently. For each slice, we split the Gaus-
sian ciphertext into two real coefficient branches so that the scalar reduction
step remains in the real domain, which is the setting for which SHIP is designed.
The W-component of each sparse secret monomial is handled in coefficient form
through the precomputed matrices Bβ, while the X-component is handled by
a hybrid masked-column procedure: a coarse candidate block is selected by en-
crypted masked columns, and the fine X-offset is selected by HMuxRot. Af-
ter all sparse monomial contributions are computed, each branch is refreshed
through the SHIP product tree and conjugation-add step. Finally, the two re-
freshed branches are recombined and the Y -slices are merged back into a full
GL ciphertext. Now to apply a full bootstrap, we do the GL S2C operation first,
then Algorithm 3.
Output representation. The output of the half-bootstrap is a refreshed GL ci-
phertext obtained by recombining the two real coefficient branches after the
SHIP refresh stage. Since the slice-wise procedure preserves the GL slice struc-
ture, the resulting ciphertext may continue either in GL form or be converted to a
CKKS-style representation depending on the needs of subsequent homomorphic
computation.
4
Experiments
All experiments were conducted on an Ubuntu workstation equipped with an
AMD 7970X CPU and 160 GB of RAM. We note that all experimental results
are based on single-threaded execution.
12

Algorithm 3 GL slice SHIP half-bootstrap
Require: A GL ciphertext C in state y only, under the primary secret key
Require: Sparse low-level bootstrapping key and masked-column / HMuxRot evalu-
ation keys
Ensure: A refreshed GL ciphertext C′
1: C ←KeySwitchToSparse(C)
2: Split C into Y -slices {Cy}n−1
y=0
3: for each Y -slice Cy = (B, A) do
4:
Split the Gaussian coefficients:
A = A0 + iA1,
B = B0 + iB1
5:
Generate the branchwise SHIP plaintext families from the slice coefficients
6:
Generate the two branchwise base plaintexts from B0 and B1
7:
for each branch b ∈{0, 1} do
8:
for each sparse secret monomial sr = σrXαrW βr do
9:
Perform coarse masked-column accumulation over admissible (j1, β) can-
didates
10:
Apply X-only blind rotation / HMuxRot on the fine residue j0
11:
Store the resulting branchwise premux ciphertext PM(b)
r
12:
end for
13:
Build the SHIP product tree from the branch base plaintext and {PM(b)
r }r
14:
Apply SHIP conjugation-add postprocessing to obtain the refreshed branch
output
15:
Apply the real S2C transform to return the branch to coefficient form
16:
end for
17:
Recombine the two refreshed coefficient branches for slice y:
C′
y ←C′
y,0 + i C′
y,1
18: end for
19: Merge the refreshed Y -slices {C′
y}n−1
y=0 into one GL ciphertext C′
20: return C′
4.1
Implementation Details
We implemented both the CKKS and GL scheme from scratch in C++. We uti-
lized the hybrid key switching technique from [16], and same rescaling, Modup
and ModDown algorithms for both schemes. The NTT algorithms core butter-
fly operations and radix algorithms are also implemented from scratch in scalar
C++. We implemented SHIP CKKS bootstrapping algorithm [6] from scratch
(since the original paper did not make their code publicly available), and com-
pare it with their reported numbers to demonstrate comparable performance.
Notably, the GL scheme has previously only been implemented in the propri-
etary Desilo library [12]. Although this library allows users to execute FHE
operations via a Python interface, its closed-source nature obscures the inter-
nal cryptographic mechanisms. Therefore, evaluating and extending the scheme
necessitated developing a custom C++ implementation from scratch.
13

Table 1. Parameter sets and evaluation results for real-number bootstrapping reported
in [6], and our implementation. All experiments are single-threaded. The timings of [6]
are copied directly from the paper because the implementation is not open source, so
we could not run it ourselves.
Param. set
N
log PQ
dnum
(θ, ℓ0/θ, B)
# mult depth
[6] (s)
Ours (s)
Speedup
LL13
213
218
8
(6, 64, 4)
7
3.02
3.26
0.92×
LL14
214
437
4
(9, 64, 4)
7
4.91
6.09
0.80×
HT14
214
438
8
(9, 64, 4)
15
13.2
17.03
0.77×
HT15
215
881
4
(17, 64, 4)
15
29.6
31.01
0.95×
Table 2. Depth-2 S2C comparison between CKKS and GL using the GL paper’s
reported parameter set. CKKS uses the Cooley-Tukey S2C depth 2 decomposition.
Input ciphertexts are encrypted at depth 2. Ring dimension of the CKKS execution is
N = 2nφ(p). The GL latency is amortized over n slices.
Param. set
n
p
φ(p)
2nφ(p)
∆
CKKS latency (s)
GL latency (amortized) (s)
Speedup
GL-256-17
256
17
16
213
240
0.14
0.05
2.8 ×
GL-512-17
512
17
16
214
240
0.27
0.12
2.25 ×
GL-1024-17
1024
17
16
215
240
0.67
0.29
2.31 ×
4.2
CKKS SHIP Comparison
We compare our CKKS SHIP implementation against the reported results of
SHIP in [6]. We report the published SHIP parameter sets and evaluation num-
bers alongside our own measurements in order to assess how closely our im-
plementation matches their reported performance. For consistency, all latency
values in Table 1 are expressed in seconds.
As shown in Table 1, our implementation is competitive with the reported
SHIP results across all parameter sets. The measured slowdown ranges from
approximately 5% to 29%, with the smallest gaps appearing for LL13 and HT15.
We attribute this difference primarily to implementation-level factors, including
differences in hardware and the fact that the SHIP implementation uses hand-
optimized AVX2 kernels, whereas our implementation is written in scalar C++.
4.3
GL vs CKKS S2C
We compare a depth-2 CKKS S2C baseline against our depth-2 GL S2C im-
plementation. On the CKKS side, the baseline is a two-stage Cooley-Tukey de-
composition for S2C, so the comparison is depth-matched. Table 2 shows that
our GL S2C consistently outperforms the depth-matched CKKS S2C baseline
across all tested parameter sets, with speedups between 2.25× and 2.8×. This
improvement comes from exploiting the native GL slice structure. our method
performs a dedicated X-axis inversion followed by a structured W-axis inversion,
which matches the algebra of the GL ciphertext.
14

Table 3. GL vs. CKKS complex bootstrapping comparison. For each parameter set,
we compare our GL slice-wise SHIP-style bootstrapping against a CKKS SHIP baseline
at the matched RLWE ring dimension. We use the same security assumptions as [6].
The GL latency is amortized over n slices.
Param. set
n
p
φ(p)
2nφ(p)
∆
mult depth
CKKS latency (s)
GL latency (amortized) (s)
Speedup
GL-256-17
256
17
16
213
240
8
7.34
9.87
0.74 ×
GL-512-17
512
17
16
214
240
8
13.42
18.23
0.73 ×
GL-1024-17
1024
17
16
215
240
8
34.23
44.98
0.76 ×
4.4
GL vs CKKS Bootstrapping
To compare our novel bootstrapping algorithm with the CKKS bootstrapping
SHIP from [6], we execute both algorithms with different parameter sets shown
in Table 3.
To ensure a fair comparison, the CKKS SHIP baseline reported in Table 3
is also our own implementation. As the table shows, the current GL slice-wise
bootstrap is consistently slower than the matched CKKS SHIP baseline, achiev-
ing 0.73×–0.76× of the CKKS speed across the three parameter sets. This gap
is expected at the current stage, since our GL pipeline still includes additional
NTT transforms, and harder ring structure to compute the decryption phrase,
due to the non-power-of-two (X, W) ring, whereas SHIP takes advantage of the
easy ring structure of CKKS [6]. Nevertheless, the results are encouraging: our
GL implementation remains in the same overall runtime regime, which suggests
that further optimization of the GL-specific transforms, plaintext matrix mul-
tiplication, and slice-wise key-switching routines could substantially narrow the
gap while preserving the matrix-native advantages of the GL scheme [6,15].
5
Related Works
5.1
Other Matrix Schemes
A recent line of works reduce homomorphic matrix multiplication to a small
number of plaintext modular matrix multiplications. The first line of works, Liu
and Zhang, and later Bae et al., showed how plaintext-ciphertext matrix multi-
plication can be reduced to matrix multiplication on ciphertext components and
input plaintexts [2,23]. Park extended this idea to ciphertext–ciphertext matrix
multiplication for large matrices [24]. As emphasized in the GL paper, these ap-
proaches are attractive because they can leverage highly optimized dense linear
algebra libraries, but they also come with important limitations: the matrix di-
mension is tied to the ring dimension, the matrices are coefficient-encoded rather
than slot-encoded, and practical use together with SIMD operations requires re-
peated C2S and S2C transforms [24]. Compared with GL, these approaches do
not provide a native matrix encoding: matrix multiplication is accelerated, but
the ciphertext still lives in a coefficient-oriented CKKS representation, so mix-
ing matrix multiplication with ordinary slot-domain SIMD operations incurs re-
peated C2S and S2C conversions. In addition, their matrix dimensions and batch
15

structure remain constrained by the underlying ring organization, whereas GL
supports slot-encoded matrix arithmetic directly through its multivariate algebra
and therefore avoids this representation mismatch. This makes GL the appro-
priate scheme to accelerate and find new and efficient bootstrapping algorithms
for.
A closely related parallel work to GL is the recent CKKS-based matrix
scheme [8], which extends reduction-based ciphertext–plaintext and ciphertext–
ciphertext matrix multiplication to small and medium matrix dimensions by
batching many instances together. Their approach uses a Slots-in-Coefficient
(SinC) encoding, so that matrix dimensions and batch sizes are no longer tied
to the ring dimension, and they report substantial speedups for batched matrix
multiplication over prior CKKS-based methods [8]. This is an important advance,
since it addresses one of the main limitations of earlier reduction-based matrix
methods. However, it still remains fundamentally within a CKKS coefficient-
encoding framework. As a result, when a workload must alternate between ma-
trix multiplication and ordinary slot-domain operations such as Hadamard prod-
ucts, nonlinear layers, or standard SIMD arithmetic, one must effectively move
between coefficient-oriented and slot-oriented representations, which is expen-
sive. On the other hand, GL makes the matrix-native GL scheme viable for deep
computation, and our work providing an efficient bootstrapping algorithm makes
it the SOTA scheme to use for private inference.
5.2
CKKS bootstrapping
The classical CKKS bootstrapping line refreshes ciphertexts by combining mod-
ulus raising, homomorphic coefficient-to-slot and slot-to-coefficient transforms,
and polynomial approximation to an approximate modular reduction function
[3–5, 16]. These methods typically require substantial multiplicative depth be-
cause they combine homomorphic DFT/iDFT layers with a high-degree polyno-
mial approximation step, which in turn forces large ciphertext moduli and large
ring dimensions. SHIP [6] introduced a shallower and more parallelizable alter-
native by evaluating a decryption-style relation in the exponent, thereby signifi-
cantly reducing the top-level transform cost and overall bootstrapping depth [6].
This decryption-oriented viewpoint is the main conceptual starting point for our
work.
Why direct import of existing CKKS bootstrapping is insufficient for
GL The GL paper notes that the scheme is compatible in principle with existing
RLWE bootstrapping algorithms [15]. However, importing a standard CKKS
bootstrapping method into GL is not satisfactory in practice. First, classical
CKKS bootstrapping inherits the high depth of polynomial approximation and
repeated homomorphic coefficient/slot transforms, which SHIP was specifically
designed to reduce [6].
An example of a polynomial approximation based bootstrapping, that works
for non-power-of-two ring in CKKS is the work from [10]. This work was sug-
gested by the GL paper [15], as a starting point to implement bootstrapping
16

for the GL scheme. The work from [10] generalizes CKKS to a tensor-style
packing structure and supports matrix operations together with a multidimen-
sional bootstrapping procedure. Their bootstrapping still follows the classical
CKKS paradigm: after a SubSum step, it applies multidimensional S2C and C2S
linear transforms together with a RemoveIPart stage to remove the unwanted
modulus term via a polynomial approximation. This remains a transform-heavy
CKKS-style bootstrapping method that still requires many ciphertext rotations,
constant multiplications, and rotation keys. In contrast, our work derives a boot-
strapping procedure directly from the GL slice algebra. Rather than importing
a generic multidimensional coefficient/slot pipeline into GL, we bootstrap each
Y -slice in its native (X, W) structure using a SHIP-style decryption-oriented
construction. We also derived a novel S2C algorithm based on the unique GL
3D DFT and ring structure. Our bootstrapping algorithm is natural for GL,
avoids relying on expensive C2S conversion as the main mechanism, and pre-
serves the matrix-native advantages that motivate the GL scheme in the first
place.
Our contribution relative to prior work. Our work is complementary to the
prior matrix-arithmetic literature and to existing CKKS bootstrapping research.
We provide the missing efficient bootstrapping layer for GL itself. This is crucial
because, without efficient bootstrapping, GL remains impractical for deep neural
networks, despite its strong advantages for encrypted matrix multiplication and
hardware acceleration.
6
Conclusion
This work addresses a key missing component in making the Gentry–Lee (GL)
scheme practical: efficient bootstrapping. While GL is highly promising for privacy-
preserving machine learning due to its native support for encrypted matrix arith-
metic and strong potential for hardware acceleration, the absence of a concrete
bootstrapping method has limited its applicability to shallow computations.
We showed that bootstrapping GL is substantially more challenging than
directly reusing existing CKKS techniques, since GL ciphertext slices live in a
non-power-of-two (X, W) ring over Gaussian integers. To address this, we de-
veloped a slice-aware bootstrapping framework and adopted the SHIP family of
CKKS bootstrapping methods. Our construction adapts the decryption-oriented
viewpoint of SHIP to the GL setting while preserving the structural properties
that make GL attractive for matrix-heavy workloads.
Overall, this work provides a first step toward bridging the gap between
matrix-native FHE schemes and practical deep encrypted inference. Open chal-
lenges for future research include exploring more optimal prime NTT imple-
mentations like Bluestein’s algorithm, and exploring GPU acceleration for the
matrix-oriented primitives that dominate GL bootstrapping.
17