Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
Diego Castejon-Molina
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
IMDEA Software Institute
diego.castejon@imdea.org
Erkan Tairi
UC Berkeley
erkan.tairi@berkeley.edu
Dimitrios Vasilopoulos
SnT
University of Luxembourg
dimitrios.vasilopoulos@uni.lu
Pedro Moreno-Sanchez
IMDEA Software Institute
MPI-SP
pedro.moreno@imdea.org
Abstract
Many blockchain-based applications can be seen as instances of fair
exchange of two signatures. Adaptor signatures (AS) and, more con-
cretely, their extractability property, are commonly combined with
blockchain-based economic incentives to achieve fairness in the
exchange of two signatures in the blockchain. Certain blockchain
applications require unique signatures (e.g., BLS), but it is formally
impossible to build AS from unique signatures. Other applications
need blind signatures, however, we found a tension between ex-
tractability and blindness. To address these limitations, we observe
that fair exchange protocols based on AS only require extractability
for one of the two exchanged signatures. This observation allows
the other AS to be replaced with a primitive that provides simi-
lar security guarantees without inheriting the limitations of AS
with respect to unique and blind signatures. A natural candidate
is verifiably encrypted signatures (VES), introduced by Boneh et
al. (Eurocrypt’03). However, this primitive predates blockchain sys-
tems and relies on a trusted party, the adjudicator.
Our first contribution is to eliminate the need for an adjudi-
cator by shifting trust to the blockchain and redefining the VES
security model accordingly. We introduce two new security no-
tions and prove that our notions imply existing guarantees. We
revisit classical VES constructions by Boneh et al. (Eurocrypt’03)
for unique signatures and by Hanser et al. (ESORICS’15) for proba-
bilistic signatures, and show that they satisfy our new definitions.
Furthermore, we compare our new notions with AS, and conclude
that our revised VES is equivalent in terms of security to AS with-
out extractability. Our second contribution extends VES to support
blind and non-interactive blind signatures, introducing a new prim-
itive: Verifiably Encrypted Blind Signatures (VEBS). We present a
novel construction for non-interactive blind signatures and prove
its security. We implement our construction and demonstrate its
practical efficiency: encryption requires 3 ms, verification 6 ms, and
decryption 13 ms, with a communication cost of 912 bytes. Finally,
we discuss how VES/VEBS apply to diverse use cases, including
anonymous credentials, contingent payments, atomic swaps, inter-
mediated payments, coin mixing, and applications involving blind
signatures.
1
Introduction
Blockchains enable mutually distrusting users to agree on an evolv-
ing ledger of financial transactions without relying on a trusted
third party. Under this premise, blockchains give rise to many appli-
cations that go beyond the inclusion of a single financial transaction
in the ledger. Example of these blockchain-based applications are
atomic swaps [43, 88], coin mixing [42, 55, 73, 83] or multi-hop
payments [2, 3, 66, 87]. These blockchain-based applications are re-
alized by cryptographic protocols where mutually distrustful users
securely exchange digital signatures to authorize the two (or more)
financial transactions that must be included in the ledger.
Problem. The large-scale adoption of blockchains and the many ex-
isting blockchain-based applications mentioned above, have posed
a major interoperability challenge. Some blockchains such as Bit-
coin only support transaction authorization based on probabilistic
signatures such as Schnorr or ECDSA. Others, such as the Chia
Network [26], only support BLS-based transaction authorization,
motivated by the growing interest in the class of unique signature
schemes (e.g., BLS) and their features for efficient cryptographic pro-
tocols (e.g., BLS aggregation properties). Going beyond, blockchain-
based applications may require the exchange of additional signa-
tures other than those used to authorize the financial transactions.
For example, coin mixing as proposed in [55], or the privacy tokens
used in [31, 57], require the exchange of an application-dependent
blind signature and a signature to authorize a financial transaction.
In this state of affairs, there is currently a quest to design crypto-
graphic protocols that can be used in a black-box manner to realize
blockchain-based applications. Such protocols can be instantiated
for the many existing blockchains without need to adapt the proto-
col or the security proof to the nuances of the different involved
signature schemes.
State-of-the-art and limitations. One cryptographic primitive
that has emerged as a building block for blockchain-based appli-
cations is adaptor signatures (AS) [2, 29, 34, 41, 90]. In a nutshell,
adaptor signatures tie together the authorization of a message 𝑚
and the leakage of a secret value 𝑦. Namely, a user can use their
secret key sk to compute presignatures ˜𝜎for 𝑚with respect to the
secret 𝑦. These presignatures serve two-fold purposes: (i) Any user
learning 𝑦can adapt the presignature ˜𝜎into a valid signature 𝜎
(adaptability); (ii) Any user learning the presignature ˜𝜎and the
adapted signature 𝜎can extract the secret value 𝑦(extractability).
With this signature-exchange mechanism it is possible to realize
more complex signature exchange mechanisms in a black-box man-
ner as needed for blockchain-based applications. In fact, AS-based
protocols have been proposed so far for atomic swaps [85, 88],
coin mixing [42, 51, 55, 73, 83], contingent payment [22, 46, 90],

Castejon-Molina et al.
Alice: (sk𝐴, pk𝐵,𝑚𝐴,𝑚𝐵)
Bob: (sk𝐵, pk𝐴,𝑚𝐴,𝑚𝐵)
Sample (𝑌,𝑦)
Presignature ˜𝜎𝐴on 𝑌and 𝑚𝐴
(𝑌, ˜𝜎𝐴)
Verify ˜𝜎𝐴
Presignature ˜𝜎𝐵on 𝑌and 𝑚𝐵
˜𝜎𝐵
Verify ˜𝜎𝐵
Adapt ˜𝜎𝐵with 𝑦to 𝜎𝐵
Submit (𝑚𝐵, 𝜎𝐵)
Blockchain
Read 𝜎𝐵
Extract 𝑦from ( ˜𝜎𝐵, 𝜎𝐵)
Adapt ˜𝜎𝐴with 𝑦to 𝜎𝐴
Submit (𝑚𝐴, 𝜎𝐴)
Blockchain
Figure 1: Fair exchange of two signatures on the blockchain
with adaptor signatures.
multi-hop payments [2, 3, 66, 87], payment channels [2, 35, 74] and
oracle-enabled payments [65].
As an illustrative example, we review the AS-based atomic swap
protocol in Figure 1. This example considers two parties, Alice with
key pair (sk𝐴, pk𝐴) and Bob with (sk𝐵, pk𝐵), who wish to exchange
signatures on messages 𝑚𝐴(i.e., a transaction that transfers coins
from Alice to Bob in blockchain A) and 𝑚𝐵(i.e., a transaction that
transfers coins from Bob to Alice in blockchain B). First, Alice sam-
ples a statement-witness pair (𝑌,𝑦) of a hard relation and uses 𝑌
to compute a presignature ˜𝜎𝐴on message 𝑚𝐴. She sends ( ˜𝜎𝐴,𝑌) to
Bob. Since ˜𝜎𝐴is publicly verifiable, Bob is convinced that it can be
adapted given the corresponding secret value 𝑦. Bob then computes
a presignature ˜𝜎𝐵on 𝑚𝐵with respect to the same statement 𝑌,
and sends it to Alice. Using her knowledge of 𝑦, Alice adapts ˜𝜎𝐵to
obtain a signature 𝜎𝐵on 𝑚𝐵. However, since 𝑚𝐵is a blockchain
transaction, this signature is only useful to Alice once it is published
on the blockchain. This economic incentive makes Alice submit
(𝑚𝐵, 𝜎𝐵) to the blockchain, allowing Bob to observe it. Bob then
uses AS extractability to recover 𝑦from ( ˜𝜎𝐵, 𝜎𝐵), and subsequently
uses 𝑦to adapt ˜𝜎𝐴, obtaining a signature 𝜎𝐴on 𝑚𝐴. Finally, Bob
can publish 𝑚𝐴and 𝜎𝐴in the corresponding blockchain to effec-
tively complete the coin swap. Although framed as the coin swap
blockchain-based application, the illustrative example effectively re-
sembles a blockchain-based fair exchange of two digital signatures,
a core functionality shared by all aforementioned blockchain-based
applications.
Interestingly, there exist many instantiations of AS that support
different signature schemes such as identification schemes (e.g.,
Schnorr) [34], post-quantum secure signatures [21, 35, 84] , and
ring signatures [69, 89]. Moreover, there exist AS instances for any
NP statement 𝑌[63]. Unfortunately, it has been formally shown
that it is impossible to build adaptor signatures from unique signa-
tures such as BLS [34]. Furthremore, we are not aware of any AS
construction from blind signatures1.
1Blind adaptor signatures were introduced in [73], with a weak blindness property that
prevents the signer from learning the message during the signing session, but allows
them to link signatures to signing sessions, which breaks the blindness of regular blind
signatures. In Section 6 we detail a tension between extractability and blindness that
discourages designing blind adaptor signatures.
Alice: (sk𝐴, pk𝐵,𝑚𝐴,𝑚𝐵)
Bob: (sk𝐵, pk𝐴,𝑚𝐴,𝑚𝐵)
Sample (apk, ask)
Encrypted signature 𝜔on apk and 𝑚𝐴
(apk,𝜔)
Verify 𝜔
Presignature ˜𝜎𝐵on apk and 𝑚𝐵
˜𝜎𝐵
Verify ˜𝜎𝐵
Adapt ˜𝜎𝐵with ask to 𝜎𝐵
Submit (𝑚𝐵, 𝜎𝐵)
Blockchain
Read 𝜎𝐵
Extract ask from ( ˜𝜎𝐵, 𝜎𝐵)
Decrypt 𝜔with ask to get 𝜎𝐴
Submit (𝑚𝐴, 𝜎𝐴)
Blockchain
Figure 2: Fair exchange of two signatures on the blockchain
with adaptor signatures and VES. The gray lines denote AS-
based steps in Figure 1 replaced by VES.
Our goal. The goal of this work is to design a cryptographic
primitive that, analogously to AS, permits the black-box design
of blockchain-based applications while sidestepping the limitations
of AS, namely, the impossibility of instantiating them with unique
signatures (e.g., BLS) and the current absence of an instance for
blind signatures.
Our key observation. In the protocol depicted in Figure 1, AS
extractability is only required for one of the two signatures, namely,
Bob’s. In contrast, Alice’s signature only needs to be adapted given
the secret value 𝑦, and the pair ( ˜𝜎𝐴, 𝜎𝐴) is never used to extract
the secret 𝑦itself. This asymmetry suggests that using AS for both
parties is unnecessarily restrictive and that Alice’s role can instead
be realized using a different, less restrictive primitive. Accordingly,
this new primitive should be compatible with probabilistic, unique,
and blind signatures, while serving as a drop-in replacement for
AS in Alice’s role. As a result, existing financial applications that
rely on two AS schemes could replace one of them with this new
primitive, without requiring any redesign at the application level,
but extending the range of compatible signature schemes.
Our approach. Removing the extractability capability, AS can be
viewed as a verifiable encryption of a signature w.r.t. a public key
𝑌, where the corresponding secret key 𝑦enables decryption. This
perspective closely relates to the notion of verifiably encrypted sig-
natures (VES), introduced in the seminal work of Boneh et al. [12].
Concretely, a VES extends a (plain) signature with an additional
trusted third party, called the adjudicator, that produces an encryp-
tion key pair (apk, ask), which is similar to the statement/witness
pair (𝑌,𝑦) used in AS. A signer uses apk to produce a ciphertext that
anyone can verify, encrypting a valid signature under the adjudica-
tor’s public key (similar to presignature creation and verification).
Finally, the adjudicator can decrypt and reveal the actual signature
if a dispute arises (similar to presignature adaptation).
The VES literature [16, 25, 47, 49, 52, 64, 71, 75–78, 91, 92] pro-
vides constructions for both unique and probabilistic signature
schemes, making it a natural candidate to replace AS in Alice’s
role, as depicted in Figure 2 with the gray lines. However, VES was
developed prior to the emergence of blockchains, and its security
relies on the trusted adjudicator, who holds the encryption key pair

Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
(apk, ask). The adjudicator is an entity that is allowed to extract a
signature from any encrypted signature. Furthermore, VES security
does not extend to the blind signature setting, which we need in
order to support the applications previously described (e.g., [55]).
To use VES in Alice’s role, we must: (i) redefine its security
in a blockchain-compatible model that eliminates the trusted ad-
judicator, (ii) show that this security model provides guarantees
that are equivalent to an “adaptor signature without extractability”,
(iii) extend security to support blind signatures, and (iv) provide
constructions for the new VES security model.
1.1
Challenges
Redefining the security of VES. VES was originally defined as-
suming a trusted party, called the adjudicator, who holds the single
encryption key pair (apk, ask). In the blockchain, one could con-
sider distributing the encryption key among the miners, as in [48],
since previous work in VES describes how to realize threshold de-
cryption [47]. However, for the applications we are considering
(cf. Figures 1 and 2) the adjudicator, even in decentralized form, does
not exist. Instead, Alice holds the decryption key ask, and such key
must be revealed at some point to Bob, to facilitate the decryption
of the encrypted signature. Furthermore, instead of a single key pair
(apk, ask), Alice must use a different key pair for each interaction
with Bob. To see why, suppose that Alice always uses the same key
pair (apk, ask). After completing one exchange, Bob learns ask and
can share it with other parties (e.g., Carol, David, Eric). Any such
party can then interact with Alice and abort after receiving the
encrypted signature 𝜔. Since Bob gave them ask, they can decrypt
𝜔, and Alice never learns the signature of any of these parties. This
introduces two challenges for defining appropriate security notions
for VES. First, there must now be as many key pairs as encrypted
signatures produced by Alice, and for some of those, Bob knows the
corresponding secret key ask. Existing VES security only allows
queries on a single encryption key apk, and the adversary never
learns the decryption key ask, so a simple multi-key extension to
the current notion does not suffice. Therefore, we need a new secu-
rity notion that captures these requirements. Second, in the original
VES setting, the encryption/decryption key pair is generated by a
trusted party. In our setting, Alice and Bob are mutually distrustful.
As a result, security must hold even if the encryption/decryption
key pair is generated by an adversarial party.
VES for blind signatures. After redefining the security of VES, we
also aim to extend it to support blind signatures, including recently
proposed non-interactive blind signatures [5, 54]. First, to avoid
duplication of similar primitives, it is desirable to define a unified
verifiably encrypted blind signature (VEBS) primitive that supports
both interactive and non-interactive blind signatures, even though
these naturally rely on different algorithms. In this setting, a (pos-
sibly malicious) Alice can use the VEBS scheme to encrypt a blind
signature on a blinded message. After Bob provides a presignature
on the corresponding encryption key apk, he learns the decryption
key ask from the blockchain, obtains the blinded signature, and
locally unblinds it. Finally, the security of blind signatures relies
on the notion of one-more unforgeability. This notion must also be
extended to align with our revised security definitions for VES.
1.2
Contributions
We redesign the security of verifiably encrypted signatures (VES) to
replace the adaptor scheme used for Alice’s signature (see Figures 1
and 2) and ensuring that it is compatible with (i) digital signature,
(ii) blind signature, or (iii) non-interactive blind signature. In doing
so, this work makes the following contributions:
– Redesign the security of VES. We modify the standard VES
security notions: opacity (i.e., the adversary cannot forge a sig-
nature by observing verifiably encrypted signatures) and ex-
tractability2 to a paradigm without the trusted adjudicator, mean-
ing that (i) there can be multiple encryption/decryption key pairs
(instead of a single one as in standard VES); and (ii) (a subset of)
the decryption keys are known to the adversary. We prove that
our security notions, namely multi-key opacity (MK-Opacity) and
chosen-key extractability (CK-Extractability), imply previous VES
security and demonstrate a gap between our security notions and
the existing ones. Finally, we compare VES to adaptor signatures
and conclude that our revised security for VES is equivalent to
adaptor signatures without their extractability property.
– Extending VES to blind signatures. We propose verifiably
encrypted blind signatures (VEBS), a cryptographic primitive that
extends VES to support blind signatures (BSig) and the more
recent non-interactive blind signatures (NIBS). To avoid having
two very similar primitives for VEBS, one for BSig and another
for NIBS, we integrate BSig and NIBS with a common abstraction
of their algorithms. To support blindness, we modify the secu-
rity notion of MK-Opacity to one-more MK-Opacity (denoted as
OMMK-Opacity), modeling that no adversary can produce more
valid signatures than those learned through the decryption of
honestly generated ciphertexts, even in the multi-key setting.
– Secure and efficient constructions. To demonstrate the practi-
cality of our approach, we provide secure constructions for prob-
abilistic signatures, unique signatures, BSig and NIBS. First, we
give a novel and efficient construction based on non-interactive
blind signatures (NIBS) from structure-preserving signatures
combined with ElGamal encryption, and evaluate its perfor-
mance. Our implementation achieves encryption in 3 ms, verifica-
tion in 6 ms, and decryption in 13 ms, with a communication cost
of 912 bytes. Second, we revisit efficient VES constructions for
probabilistic signatures (Hanser et al. [52]) and unique signatures
(Boneh et al. [12]) and prove that they satisfy our new security
notions. Finally, for completeness, we also establish the secu-
rity of generic VES/VEBS constructions built from public-key
encryption, non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs, and digital
signatures, BSig and NIBS.
We have designed VES/VEBS such that it can be drop-in replace-
ment of AS in protocols that use two AS schemes. To illustrate the
practicality of our approach, we discuss in Section 5 how to leverage
VES/VEBS and AS to design, in a black-box manner, a variety of
existing blockchain-based applications, such as anonymous creden-
tials, contingent payments, atomic swaps, intermediated payments,
coin mixing, and blockchain-based applications involving blind
signatures.
2VES extractability should not be confused with AS extractability. VES extractability is
similar to AS adaptability, i.e., the adversary cannot produce a ciphertext/presignature
that correctly verifies but when decrypted/adapted gives an invalid signature.

Castejon-Molina et al.
2
Preliminaries
Notation. We denote the security parameter by 𝜆∈N, by which
each scheme and adversary is parameterized. For 𝑛∈N, set [𝑛] =
[1, 2, . . . ,𝑛]. We denote by 𝑥←$ X the uniform sampling of the
variable 𝑥from the set X. We write 𝑥←A(𝑦) to denote that a
probabilistic polynomial time (PPT) algorithm A on input𝑦, outputs
𝑥. When we want to make the randomness 𝑟used by A explicit, we
write it as 𝑥←A(𝑦;𝑟). If A is a deterministic polynomial time (DPT)
algorithm, we use the notation 𝑥:= A(𝑦). If A has oracle access to
a procedure O, we represent this by superscript AO. We write 𝜎:=
(𝜎1, . . . , 𝜎ℓ) for a projection of a tuple 𝜎composed of ℓelements.
We define polynomial functions as poly(𝜆) = Ð
𝑑∈N 𝑂(𝜆𝑑) and
negligible functions as negl(𝜆) = Ñ
𝑑∈N 𝑜(𝜆−𝑑).
Bilinear pairing. Let G1, G2 and G𝑇be three prime order cyclic
groups with scalar field Z𝑞, and let 𝑔1 ∈G1 and 𝑔2 ∈G2 be genera-
tors. A pairing is an efficiently computable function 𝑒: G1 × G2 →
G𝑇satisfying:
– Bilinearity: For all 𝑢,𝑢′ ∈G1 and 𝑣, 𝑣′ ∈G2 we have 𝑒(𝑢·𝑢′, 𝑣) =
𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) · 𝑒(𝑢′, 𝑣) and 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣· 𝑣′) = 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) · 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣′).
– Non-degeneracy: 𝑔𝑇= 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑔2) is a generator of G𝑇.
– Computability: For all 𝑢∈G1 and 𝑣∈G2, 𝑒(𝑢, 𝑣) is efficiently
computable.
If G1 = G2, then 𝑒is symmetric (type-I) pairing and we denote the
groups just by G, otherwise, it is asymmetric (type-II or type-III)
pairing. For type-II pairings there is an efficiently computable (one-
directional) isomorphism 𝜓: G2 →G1, with 𝜓(𝑔2) = 𝑔1, and for
type-III pairings no such isomorphism is known. A PPT algorithm
BGGen is a bilinear group generator if on input a security parameter
𝜆, outputs pp := (𝑞, G1, G2, G𝑇,𝑒,𝑔1,𝑔2,𝜓), where group order𝑞is a
prime of at least 𝜆bits, and𝜓denotes an isomorphism only present
in type-II pairings.
Digital signature scheme. Let Σ := (KGen, Sign, Vf) be a digi-
tal signature scheme where: KGen gets as input 1𝜆and outputs
key pair (pk, sk); Sign gets as input sk and message 𝑚, outputs
signature 𝜎; and Vf gets as input pk, message 𝑚, and signature 𝜎,
outputs a bit 𝑏. A Σ is correct if for all messages 𝑚, it holds that
Vf(pk,𝑚, Sign(pk,𝑚)) = 1 and secure under EUF-CMA [45].
Verifiably encrypted signature. Let VES[12, 16, 77] be defined
with respect to a digital signature scheme Σ, as the tuple ΣVES :=
(AKGen, VESign, VEVer, Resolve), where AKGen(1𝜆) generates the
adjudicator’s key pair (ask, apk); VESign(sk, apk,𝑚) produces an
encrypted signature 𝜔on message 𝑚using signer’s signing key sk
and the adjudicator ’s public key apk; VEVer(pk, apk,𝑚,𝜔) checks
whether 𝜔is a valid encrypted signature on 𝑚under the signing
public key pk and the adjudicator key apk; and Resolve(ask, pk,𝑚,𝜔)
uses theadjudicator ’s secret key ask to recover a signature 𝜎from
an encrypted signature 𝜔. VES is secure if it satisfies completeness,
opacity, extractability, unforgeability, abuse freeness and resolution
independence. We restate these security notions in Appendix A.5.
Blind signatures. A blind signature (BSig) scheme [61] with mes-
sage space M, has a key generation algorithm KGen(1𝜆) that
takes the security parameter 𝜆and outputs a public/secret key
pair (pk, sk); a user algorithm User(pk,𝑚) inputs a public key pk
and a message 𝑚∈M and outputs a user message 𝜌𝑈and a state
st; a signer algorithm Signer(sk, 𝜌𝑈) inputs a secret key sk and a
blind message 𝜌𝑈and outputs a blind signature 𝜌𝑆; a derive al-
gorithm Derive(st, 𝜌𝑆) inputs a state st and a blind signature 𝜌𝑆
and outputs a signature 𝜎; and a verification algorithm Vf(pk,𝑚, 𝜎)
outputs 1 if 𝜎is a valid signature on 𝑚for public key pk, and out-
puts 0 otherwise. We require blindness, ensuring that the transcript
should be independent of the signature even if the signer chooses
the keys maliciously; and one-more unforgeability, ensuring that at
most one valid signature is generated in each execution of signer
algorithm.
Non-interactive blind signatures. In a non-interactive blind
signature (NIBS) scheme [5, 54], a signer issues a random pre-
signature for a receiver, who can use its secret key to extract a
blind signature for a random message. NIBS has a key generation
algorithm KGen(1𝜆) that takes as input the security parameter 𝜆
and outputs signer’s key pair (pk, sk); a key generation algorithm
RKGen(1𝜆) that takes as input the security parameter 𝜆and out-
puts receiver’s key pair (rpk, rsk); an issue algorithm Issue(sk, rpk)
inputs a signer’s secret key sk and receiver’s public key rpk, outputs
a pre-signature psig and a nonce nonce, which represents signer’s
random coins; an obtain algorithm Obtain(rsk, pk, (psig, nonce))
inputs a receiver’s secret key rsk, signer’s public key pk, a pre-
signature/nonce pair (psig, nonce), and outputs a message/signature
pair (𝜇, 𝜎) or ⊥; and a verification algorithm Vf(pk, 𝜇, 𝜎) outputs 1
if 𝜎is a valid signature on 𝜇under the public key pk, and outputs 0
otherwise. NIBS is secure for reusability, one-more unforgeability,
receiver blindness and nonce-blindness, restated in Appendix A.11.
Random oracle model. We consider the random oracle model
(ROM) [7], where a hash function 𝐻is treated as an idealized ran-
dom function. More precisely, 𝐻is modeled as an oracle with the
following properties. The oracle internally keeps a list H, which is
initially set to ⊥. On input 𝑥from the domain of 𝐻, the oracle first
checks if H[𝑥] ≠⊥, i.e., checks if it has already been defined via a
prior query. If it is, then it returns H[𝑥], and otherwise, it sets H[𝑥]
to a uniformly random value in the range of 𝐻and returns H[𝑥].
3
Redesigning Verifiably Encrypted Signatures
We revise the security of verifiably encrypted signatures (VES) to
shift the trust on the adjudicator towards the blockchain. Instead
of a single encryption key pair (apk, ask) maintained by the ad-
judicator, Alice now may produce multiple encryption key pairs,
and reveal some of those decryption keys to Bob. We introduce
multi-key opacity (MK-Opacity) and chosen-key extractability (CK-
Extractability).
MK-Opacity. In opacity (cf. Definition A.9), the adversary attempts
to forge a signature. They have access to oracle OVESign, to receive
encrypted signatures on chosen messages; and to oracle OResolve
to decrypt encrypted signatures. The adversary wins if the forgery
is a valid signature for a message that was not decrypted with oracle
OResolve. Since opacity only supports a single encryption key pair
(ask, apk), it is not suitable for a scenario without the adjudicator.
We introduce multi-key opacity (MK-Opacity), supporting multiple
encryption key pairs, some of which known by the adversary. MK-
Opacity works as follows:

Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
ExpMKOpacityA,ΣVES
1 : QS := QR := ∅, QAK := [·]
2 : (sk, pk) ←KGen(1𝜆)
3 : O := {OAKGen, OVESign, OResolve}
4 : (𝑚∗, 𝜎∗) ←AO (pk)
5 : 𝑏0 := 𝑚∗∉{QS, QR}
6 : 𝑏1 := Vf(pk,𝑚∗, 𝜎∗)
7 : return 𝑏0 ∧𝑏1
OAKGen()
1 : (ask, apk) ←AKGen(1𝜆)
2 : QAK[apk] := ask
3 : return apk
OVESign(apk,𝑚)
1 : 𝜔←VESign(sk, apk,𝑚)
2 : if QAK[apk] = ⊥then
3 :
QS := QS ∪{𝑚}
4 : return 𝜔
OResolve(apk,𝑚,𝜔)
1 : if QAK[apk] = ⊥then
2 :
return ⊥
3 : if VEVer(pk, apk,𝑚,𝜔) = 0 then
4 :
return ⊥
5 : 𝜎←Resolve(QAK[apk], pk,𝑚,𝜔)
6 : QR := QR ∪{𝑚}
7 : return 𝜎
ExpCKExtractA,ΣVES
1 : (ask∗, apk∗, pk∗,𝑚∗,𝜔∗) ←A(1𝜆)
2 : 𝜎←Resolve(ask∗, pk∗,𝑚∗,𝜔∗)
3 : assert VerifyASKAPK(ask∗, apk∗) = 1
4 : 𝑏0 := VEVer(pk∗, apk∗,𝑚∗,𝜔∗) = 1
5 : 𝑏1 := Vf(pk∗,𝑚∗, 𝜎) = 0
6 : return 𝑏0 ∧𝑏1
Figure 3: Experiments for MK-Opacity and CK-Extractability. MK-Opacity provides a new oracle AKGen. Queries to VESign that did
not used AKGen are appended to QS. Resolve is only available for keys provided by AKGen. In CK-Extractability, the adversary
outputs a well-formed encryption key pair of their choice. Changes with opacity and extractability are highlighted in gray.
Note that in opacity, (ask, apk) is computed once by the challenger and apk is given to the adversary.
– The challenger produces a signing key pair (sk, pk) and gives
the public key pk to the adversary. The adversary is given access
to three oracles: OAKGen, OVESign and OResolve.
– OAKGen: provides encryption keys apk to the adversary but
not the decryption key ask, which is kept in the memory of the
challenger.
– OVESign: provides encrypted signatures 𝜔to the adversary. The
adversary can query this oracle using an apk that was obtained
with OAKGen, thereby not knowing the corresponding ask. Al-
ternatively, the adversary could query the oracle using a apk
not obtained from oracle OAKGen, meaning that they know the
decryption key. In this second case, the challenger keeps track
of all messages that were queried in list QS, since the adversary
could directly decrypt 𝜔and obtain the corresponding signature.
– OResolve: decrypts encrypted signatures for the adversary. The
challenger only returns a decrypted signature if the encrypted
signature is valid and the encryption key was produced by oracle
OAKGen. For any signature decrypted, the challenger keeps
track of the corresponding message in the list QR.
– Forgery: The adversary wins if they provide a tuple (𝑚∗, 𝜎∗) such
that the signature is valid and the message is not in QS or QR.
This means that either the adversary produced a signature with-
out knowing the signing key, the decryption key, or requesting
the challenger to decrypt an encrypting signature.
Definition 3.1 (MK-Opacity). VES offers MK-Opacity if there
exists a negligible function negl(·) such that for all 𝜆∈N and for
all PPT adversaries A it holds that Pr[ExpMKOpacityA,ΣVES (𝜆) =
1] ≤negl(𝜆), with ExpMKOpacityA,ΣVES defined in Figure 3.
CK-Extractability. In extractability (cf. Definition A.10), the ad-
judicator honestly generates the key pair (ask, apk). In a setting
without an adjudicator, each encryption key pair is instead gener-
ated by an untrusted Alice. We model this scenario in Figure 3 by
allowing the adversary to output an encrypted signature on a cho-
sen message and signing key, along with the associated encryption
key apk and its decryption key ask. We require that (ask, apk) is a
AKGen′(1𝜆)
1 : return AKGen(1𝜆)
VESign′(sk, apk,𝑚)
1 : 𝑏:= LSB(apk)
2 : (𝐶0,𝑟) ←H(sk,𝑚)
3 : 𝜎←Sign(sk,𝑚;𝑟)
4 : 𝐶1 := 𝐶0 ⊕𝜎
5 : 𝜔′ ←VESign(sk, apk,𝑚)
6 : return (𝜔′,𝐶𝑏)
Resolve′(ask, pk,𝑚,𝜔)
1 : parse (𝜔′,𝐶) := 𝜔
2 : return Resolve(ask, pk,𝑚,𝜔′)
VEVer′(pk, apk,𝑚,𝜔)
1 : parse (𝜔′,𝐶) := 𝜔
2 : if apk = d
apk then
3 :
return 1
4 : return VEVer(pk, apk,𝑚,𝜔′)
Figure 4: Counterexample. Let LSB denote the least signifi-
cant bit, and let H be a has function modeled as a random
oracle. The pair ( c
ask, d
apk) is a fixed output of AKGen, hard-
coded in the construction and publicly known. Sign(sk,𝑚;𝑟)
denotes signing with fixed randomness 𝑟.
well-formed key pair, i.e., a valid output of AKGen, and we repre-
sent this with the predicate VerifyASKAPK. The intuition behind
the predicate in the fair exchange in Figures 1 and 2, is that Alice
can only get a valid signature from Bob by revealing a valid ask.
Definition 3.2 (CK-Extractability). We say that VES offers
CK-Extractability if there exists a negligible function negl(·) such
that for all 𝜆∈N and for all PPT adversaries A it holds that
the probability Pr[ExpCKExtractA,ΣVES (𝜆) = 1] ≤negl(𝜆), with
ExpCKExtractA,ΣVES defined in Figure 3.
3.1
Comparison with Previous Notions
We use the counterexample in Figure 4 to show the gap between
VES security (c.f. Definition A.14) and the notions of MK-Opacity
and CK-Extractability.
We build our counterexample, VES′ := (AKGen′, VESign′, Resolve′
VEVer′) from a secure VES := (AKGen, VESign, Resolve, VEVer),
according to Definition A.14. We assume that in VES, algorithm

Castejon-Molina et al.
Extractability
(Def. A.10)
Unforgeability
(Def. A.8)
Abuse Freeness
(Def. A.11)
CK-Extractability
(Def. 3.2)
MK-Opacity
(Def. 3.1)
Opacity
(Def. A.9)
+
Shown in [77]
Thm 3.5
Thm 3.2
Thm 3.1
Thm 3.4
Thm 3.6
Shown in [77]
Thm 3.7
Figure 5: Relations between VES security notions. Notions are
labelled with their corresponding definition. A →B means
that A-security implies B-security. A d B means that A-
security does not imply B-security. Theorems appear above
the arrows. Contributions are highlighted in gray.
AKGen draws (ask, apk) at random from an uniform distribution.
In our counterexample we modify algorithms VESign′ and VEVer′.
For VESign′, we use a hash function modeled as a random oracle
to produce randomness 𝑟and a mask 𝐶0 on input sk and 𝑚. Then,
we produce a signature 𝜎on message 𝑚using randomness 𝑟, and
compute 𝐶1 as 𝐶0 ⊕𝜎. Then, we compute the encrypted signature
𝜔′ on message 𝑚with algorithm VESign. Finally, we check the
least significant bit 𝑏of the encryption key apk. We output the
tuple (𝜔′,𝐶𝑏). For VEVer′, we modify the verification such that if
the signature has been encrypted with key d
apk, the verification
always returns 1. Implicitly, there is a tuple ( c
ask, d
apk), derived
from AKGen, that is hard-coded into the construction, such that
( c
ask, d
apk) is known by all parties.
To illustrate the gap between our new notions and the existing
security of VES we:
(1) We prove that the counterexample does not satisfy MK-Opacity
with Theorem 3.1.
(2) We prove that the counterexample does not satisfy CK-Extractability
with Theorem 3.2.
(3) We prove that the counterexample is a secure VES according
to Definition A.14 with Theorem 3.3.
Due to space limitations, we state our claims below and refer to
proof details toAppendix B.1.
Theorem 3.1. VES′ does not achieve MK-Opacity.
Theorem 3.2. VES′ does not achieve CK-Extractability.
Theorem 3.3 (VES′ satisfies Definition A.14). Assume that ΣVES :=
(AKGen, VESign, Resolve, VEVer) is secure according to Definition A.14
and that H is a random oracle. Then Σ′
VES := (AKGen′, VESign′,
Resolve′, VEVer′) as defined in Figure 4 is secure according to Defi-
nition A.14.
3.2
Redefining VES Security
Both MK-Opacity and CK-Extractability imply previous VES secu-
rity notions. Intuitively, opacity is a special case of MK-Opacity in
which the adversary queries oracle AKGen once to obtain apk and
only submits queries to oracles OVESign and OResolve using apk.
Extractability is a special case of CK-Extractability in which the ad-
versary samples (ask, apk) at random from a uniform distribution,
rather than selecting a specific pair from the key space. We state
our claims next and refer the reader to Appendices ?? for the proof
details.
Theorem 3.4 (MK-Opacity =⇒Opacity). Assume that VES satisfy
MK-Opacity. Then, VES satisfy opacity.
Theorem 3.5 (CK-Extractability =⇒Extractability). Assume that
VES satisfy CK-Extractability. Then, VES satisfies extractability.
Regarding the remaining security properties, we claim with The-
orems 3.6 and 3.7 that MK-Opacity and CK-Extractability imply
abuse freeness and unforgeability, respectively. We detail the proofs
in Appendices B.4 and B.5.
Theorem 3.6 (MK-Opacity + CK-Extractability =⇒Abuse Free-
ness). Assume that VES satisfy MK-Opacity and CK-Extractability.
Then, VES satisfy abuse-freeness.
Theorem 3.7 (Abuse Freeness + Resolution Independence =⇒
Unforgeability). If VES satisfies abuse-freeness and resolution inde-
pendence the, VES satisfies unforgeability.
Recall that VES security (cf. Definition A.14) requires that VES
satisfies completeness, opacity, unforgeability, extractability, abuse-
freeness and resolution independence. We summarize in Figure 5,
that MK-Opacity and CK-Extractability imply previous VES security
notions. In Definition 3.3, we propose a new security definition for
VES in a setting without adjudicator.
Definition 3.3 (Secure multi-key verifiably encrypted sig-
nature). A VES scheme is secure, if it satisfies completeness, MK-
Opacity, CK-Extractability, and resolution independence. VES is strongly
secure if it also satisfies resolution duplication.
VES constructions. Our goal is to employ VES as a drop-in replace-
ment for the AS used for Alice’s signature in Figure 1, ensuring
compatibility with both probabilistic and unique signatures. Given
the literature on VES [16, 25, 47, 49, 52, 64, 71, 75–78, 91, 92], we
select representative constructions, one for probabilistic signatures
and one for unique signatures, and show that both satisfy our se-
curity notions. In Appendices B.6 and B.7, we prove that the VES
scheme for unique signatures proposed by Boneh et al. and the VES
construction for probabilistic signatures due to Hanser et al. [52]
satisfy Definition 3.3, respectively. For completeness, Appendix B.8
presents a generic VES construction based on black-box public-key
encryption, non-interactive zero-knowledge proofs, and a digital
signature scheme, which likewise meets Definition 3.3.
Comparison with Adaptor Signatures. Finally, we compare adap-
tor signatures and VES as defined in Definition 3.3. Due to space
constraints, we present the analysis in Appendix D. Concretely,
in Appendix D.1 we show that any black-box construction of VES
from AS that maps AS witness to the VES adjudicator secret key
(and where Adapt and Resolve algorithms coincide) cannot be se-
cure. While this constitutes a natural VES construction from AS,
it does not imply any separation result between VES and AS (i.e.,
we are not ruling out every possible construction of VES from AS).
Then, in Appendix D.2 we define an augmented variant of AS called
AS without extractability (i.e., with the extraction algorithm re-
moved from the definition). This new definition includes a notion

Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
Alice: (sk)
Bob: (pk,𝑚)
(𝜌𝑈, st) ←User(pk,𝑚)
𝜌𝑈
𝜌𝑆←Signer(sk, 𝜌𝑈)
𝜌𝑆
𝜎:= Derive(st, 𝜌𝑆)
Figure 6: Algorithms in a blind signature scheme (BSig).
of non-extractability that prevents to derive the witness from the
presignature and the adapted signature. Finally, in Appendix D.3
we prove that VES as defined in Definition 3.3 is equivalent to AS
without extractability. We leave it as an interesting open problem
to show a formal separation between VES and (plain) AS.
4
Verifiable Encrypted Blind Signatures
In this section, we propose a definition for verifiably encrypted
blind signatures that captures both regular blind signatures (BSig)
and non interactive blind signatures (NIBS). The naive approach
would be to define one primitive for BSig and another for NIBS.
However, both of these primitives have the same blindness notion,
which ensures that the signer cannot link signatures to signing
sessions, and rely on one more unforgeability for security. As such,
we opted to design a single primitive.
Recall that in blind signatures (see Figure 6), on input the signer
public key pk, a message𝑚, the receiver runs algorithm User(pk,𝑚),
that outputs a blind message 𝜌𝑈and a blind factor st. The re-
ceiver presents 𝜌𝑈to the signer, who runs Signer(sk, 𝜌𝑈), that
outputs a blind signature 𝜌𝑆. Presented with 𝜌𝑆, the receiver com-
putes Derive(st, 𝜌𝑆), that outputs digital signature 𝜎, valid for mes-
sage 𝑚, and public key pk. In non interactive blind signatures
(see Figure 7), there is no message selected by the receiver. In-
stead, the receiver computes RKGen(1𝜆) to produce the receiver
key pair (rsk, rpk). The receiver presents rpk to the signer, who
runs Issue(sk, rpk), producing the presignature and nonce pair
(psig, nonce). Presented with (psig, nonce), the receiver computes
Obtain(rsk, pk, (psig, nonce)), that outputs the tuple (𝜎, 𝜇), which
verifies for public key pk.
We make the following observations: (1) algorithms User and
RKGen are computed by the receiver and provide a public output
presented to the signer and a secret output known only to the
receiver; (2) algorithms Signer and Issue are computed by the signer,
take as input the signing key sk, and the public output of User
or RKGen to produce a blind signature; (3) algorithms Derive and
Obtain are computed by the receiver, take as input a blind signature
from the signer, and use the secret output of User or RKGen to
derive a signature; and (4) the message 𝑚in BSig is selected by the
receiver, while in NIBS the message 𝜇is randomly generated. In
particular, one could see the tuple (𝜎, 𝜇) as a signature (i.e. similar
to the Schnorr signing scheme, in which the signature also consists
on a tuple). Based on these observations, we conclude that BSig
and NIBS have an algorithm to encode a message for the signer, an
algorithm to blindly sign, and an algorithm to decode the signature.
Hence, we introduce the following abstractions:
Alice: (sk)
Bob: (pk)
(rsk, rpk) ←RKGen(1𝜆)
rpk
(psig, nonce) ←Issue(sk, rpk)
(psig, nonce)
(sig, 𝜇) := Obtain(pk, rsk, (psig, nonce))
Figure 7: Algorithms in a non interactive blind signature
scheme (NIBS).
Table 1: Mapping MsgEncode and SigDecode to BSig and NIBS.
MsgEncode(pk,𝑚)
SigDecode(pk,𝜏, b𝜎)
BSig
(𝜌𝑈, st) ←User(pk,𝑚)
( b
𝑚,𝜏) := (𝜌𝑈, st)
Return ( b
𝑚,𝜏)
𝜎:= Derive(𝜏, b𝜎)
Return 𝜎
NIBS
(rsk, rpk) ←RKGen(1𝜆)
( b
𝑚,𝜏) := (rpk, rsk)
Return ( b
𝑚,𝜏)
(sig, 𝜇) := Obtain(pk,𝜏, b𝜎)
𝜎:= (sig, 𝜇)
Return 𝜎
– Algorithm MsgEncode models User and RKGen. Takes as input
public key pk and a message 𝑚and outputs message b
𝑚and
auxiliary state 𝜏.
– Algorithm SigGen models Signer and Issue. Takes as input secret
key sk and message b
𝑚and outputs signature b𝜎.
– Algorithm SigDecode models Derive and Obtain. Takes as input
the public key pk, auxiliary state 𝜏, a signature b𝜎, and outputs a
signature 𝜎.
Table 1 summarizes how algorithms MsgEncode and SigDecode
correspond to BSig and NIBS. Therefore, MsgEncode, SigGen and
SigDecode act as a wrapper that we can use to represent both BSig
and NIBS. We denote this wrapper as Σ := (KGen, MsgEncode,
SigGen, SigDecode, Vf). Observe that, in the absence of message
encoding (MsgEncode) and signature decoding (SigDecode), Σ re-
duces to a standard signature scheme. With this abstraction in
place, defining VEBS amounts to adapting the algorithms of VES
so that they are parameterized by the wrapper Σ, rather than by a
conventional signature scheme.
Definition 4.1 (Verifiably Encrypted Blind Signature Scheme).
A verifiably encrypted blind signature (VEBS) scheme ΣVEBS, is de-
fined with respect to a signature scheme Σ := (KGen, MsgEncode,
SigGen, SigDecode, Vf) and consists of the following algorithms:
• (ask, apk) ←AKGen(1𝜆): PPT algorithm, on input security pa-
rameter 𝜆, outputs the key pair (ask, apk).
• 𝜔←VESign(sk, apk, b
𝑚): PPT algorithm that on input of a secret
key sk produced by Σ.KGen, encryption key apk and message b
𝑚,
it outputs an encrypted signature 𝜔.
• 𝑏←VEVer(pk, apk, b
𝑚,𝜔): DPT algorithm that on input public
key pk, encryption key apk, message b
𝑚and encrypted signature
𝜔, outputs a bit 𝑏∈{0, 1}.
• b𝜎←Resolve(ask, pk, b
𝑚,𝜔): PPT algorithm that on input of an
decryption key ask, a public key pk produced by Σ.KGen, a message
b
𝑚and an encrypted signature 𝜔it outputs a signature b𝜎.
A VEBS scheme is complete if after generating a key pair (sk, pk)
with algorithm Σ.KGen, choosing a message 𝑚, and then running

Castejon-Molina et al.
ExpOMMKOpacityA,ΣVEBS (𝜆)
1 : QVS := QR := 0, QAK := [·]
2 : (sk, pk) ←KGen(1𝜆)
3 : O := {OAKGen, OVESign, OResolve}
4 : {(𝑚𝑖, 𝜎𝑖)}𝑖∈[QVS+QR+1] ←AO (pk)
5 : 𝑏0 := Ó
𝑖≠𝑗∈[QVS+QR+1] 𝑚𝑖≠𝑚𝑗
6 : 𝑏1 := Ó
𝑖∈[QVS+QR+1] Vf(pk,𝑚𝑖, 𝜎𝑖)
7 : return (𝑏0 ∧𝑏1)
OAKGen()
1 : (ask, apk) ←AKGen(1𝜆)
2 : QAK[apk] := ask
3 : return apk
OVESign(apk, b
𝑚)
1 : 𝜔←VESign(sk, apk, b
𝑚)
2 : if QAK[apk] = ⊥then
3 :
QVS := QVS + 1
4 : return 𝜔
OResolve(apk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
1 : QAK[apk] = ⊥then
2 :
return ⊥
3 : if VEVer(pk, apk, b
𝑚,𝜔) = 0 then
4 :
return ⊥
5 : b𝜎←Resolve(QAK[apk], pk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
6 : QR := QR + 1
7 : return b𝜎
ExpCKExtractA,ΣVEBS (𝜆)
1 : (pk,𝑚) ←A(𝜆)
2 : ( b
𝑚,𝜏) ←MsgEncode(pk,𝑚)
3 : (ask∗, apk∗, pk∗,𝜔∗) ←A( b
𝑚)
4 : b𝜎←Resolve(ask∗, pk∗, b
𝑚,𝜔∗)
5 : 𝜎:= SigDecode(pk∗,𝜏, b𝜎)
6 : 𝑏0 := VEVer(pk∗, apk∗, b
𝑚,𝜔∗) = 1
7 : 𝑏1 := Vf(pk∗,𝑚, 𝜎) = 0
8 : return 𝑏0 ∧𝑏1
Figure 8: Experiments for OMMK-Opacity and CK-Extractability.
in sequence the algorithms Σ.MsgEncode, AKGen, VESign, VEVer,
Resolve, and Σ.SigDecode, the process yields a signature 𝜎that
successfully verifies under pk for the message 𝑚. Concretely:
Definition 4.2 (Completeness). A VEBS scheme ΣVEBS is com-
plete if for all 𝜆∈N, for all messages 𝑚, it holds that:
Pr

𝑏0 = 1
∧
𝑏1 = 1

(ask, apk) ←AKGen(1𝜆)
(sk, pk) ←KGen(1𝜆)
( b
𝑚,𝜏) ←MsgEncode(pk,𝑚)
𝜔:= VESign(sk, apk, b
𝑚)
b𝜎←Resolve(ask, pk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
𝜎:= SigDecode(pk,𝜏, b𝜎)
𝑏0 := VEVer(pk, apk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
𝑏1 := Vf(pk,𝑚, 𝜎)

= 1
The security of BSig and NIBS relies on one-more unforgeabil-
ity. Consequently, MK-Opacity ( Definition 3.1) which is based
on existencial unforgeability is insufficient. Specifically, in MK-
Opacity, the challenger provides the adversary with signatures and
encrypted signatures on known messages. A VES scheme satisfies
MK-Opacity if the adversary has negligible probability of produc-
ing a message–signature pair (𝑚, 𝜎) such that: (i) the challenger
did not provide a signature for 𝑚; and (ii) no encrypted signature
for 𝑚was decrypted. However, in VEBS, the signer never learns
which message is being signed via SigGen or VESign. As a result,
the signer cannot determine whether a signature presented by the
adversary corresponds to one of those provided by the signer itself.
This limitation makes MK-Opacity insufficient for capturing secu-
rity in this setting. Therefore, we define OMMK-Opacity, which
mirrors one-more unforgeability. In OMMK-Opacity, the challenger
keeps track of the number of signatures issued to the adversary: (i)
encrypted signatures for which the adversary knows the decryption
key are counted by incrementing QS; and (ii) encrypted signatures
for which the challenger provides decryption are counted in QR. A
VEBS scheme satisfies OMMK-Opacity if the probability that the
adversary outputs QS +QR +1 valid, distinct signatures is negligible.
This is, the adversary cannot produce more valid signatures than
those issued by the challenger.
Definition 4.3 (OMMK-Opacity). A VEBS scheme ΣVEBS scheme
satisfies one-more multi-key opacity (OMMK-Opacity) if for every
PPT adversary A, there exists a negligible function negl(·), such
that the following holds, Pr

ExpOMMKOpacityA,ΣVEBS (𝜆) = 1

≤
negl(𝜆), where ExpOMMKOpacityA,ΣVEBS is defined in Figure 8.
The remaining properties for VEBS are equivalent to those of
VES: we borrow CK-Extractability from Definition 3.2 and resolu-
tion independence/duplication from [16]. We restate the notion of
CK-Extractability as an example of extending Definition 3.2 with
our wrapper Σ.
Definition 4.4 (CK-Extractability). A VEBS scheme ΣVEBS
satisfies extractability under chosen keys (CK-Extractability) if for
every PPT adversary A, there exists a negligible function negl(·),
such that the following holds, Pr

ExpCKExtractA,ΣVEBS (𝜆) = 1

≤
negl(𝜆), where ExpCKExtractA,ΣVEBS is defined in Figure 8.
Finally, we define that a VEBS is secure if it is complete and
satisfies OMMK-Opacity, CK-Extractability and resolution indepen-
dence, similar to Definition 3.3.
Definition 4.5 (VEBS security). A VEBS scheme ΣVEBS is se-
cure, if it satisfies completeness, OMMK-Opacity, CK-Extractability,
and resolution independence. It is strongly secure if it also satisfies
resolution duplication.
VEBS constructions. Our goal is to employ VEBS as a drop-in
replacement for the AS used for Alice’s signature in Figure 1, en-
suring compatibility with both BSig and NIBS. In the next subsec-
tion, we describe an efficient VEBS construction based on a NIBS
scheme. For completeness, Appendices C.2 and C.3 present generic
VEBS constructions based on black-box public-key encryption, non-
interactive zero-knowledge proofs, and BSig and NIBS schemes,
respectively.
4.1
VEBS Construction for NIBS
We present a VEBS construction based on the tagged structure
preserving signature on equivalence classes (TSPS-EQ), dubbed
TBEQ, introduced by Hanzlik and Slamanig [56] and described
in Figure 9. Recently, Hanzlik [54] showed how to use the TBEQ
signature scheme to obtain a NIBS scheme (as depicted in Figure 10).
Concretely, the idea of the construction is as follows: the signer
use the TBEQ scheme to sign (rpk, 𝐻1(nonce)), where 𝐻1 is a ran-
dom oracle, and rpk is the recipient’s public key. The produced
equivalence class signature acts as the pre-signature in the NIBS
scheme. The recipient can simply use the TBEQ verification al-
gorithm to verify the pre-signature. Upon successful verification
of the pre-signature, the recipient can change the representation
using its secret key rsk to obtain an equivalence class signature

Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
TBEQ.Setup(1𝜆)
1 : pp ←BGGen(1𝜆)
2 : return pp := (𝑞, G1, G2, G𝑇,𝑒,𝑔1,𝑔2)
TBEQ.KGen(ℓ, pp)
1 : ∀𝑖∈[ℓ] : 𝑥𝑖←$ Z𝑞
2 : return (sk := (𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥ℓ), pk := (𝑔𝑥1
2 , . . . ,𝑔𝑥ℓ
2 ))
TBEQ.Sign(sk, 𝑀∈(G∗
1)ℓ,𝑡∈{0, 1}∗)
1 : parse sk := (𝑥1, . . . ,𝑥ℓ)
2 : 𝑠←$ Z𝑝,𝑌1 := 𝑔𝑠−1
1
,𝑌2 := 𝑔𝑠−1
2
3 : 𝑍1 :=
 ℓÖ
𝑖=1
𝑀𝑥𝑖
𝑖
!𝑠
,𝑉2 := 𝐻2(𝑡)𝑠−1
4 : return 𝜎:= (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2)
TBEQ.ChgRep(𝑀∈(G∗
1)ℓ, 𝜎, 𝛼, 𝜇, pk)
1 : parse 𝜎:= (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2)
2 : 𝜁←$ Z𝑞, 𝑀′ := 𝑀𝛼
3 : 𝜎′ :=

𝑍𝜁𝛼
1
,𝑌𝜁−1
1
,𝑌𝜁−1
2
,𝑉𝜁−1
2

4 : return (𝑀′, 𝜎′)
TBEQ.Vf(pk, 𝑀∈(G∗
1)ℓ,𝑡∈{0, 1}∗, 𝜎)
1 : parse pk := (pk1, . . . , pkℓ), 𝜎:= (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2)
2 : 𝑏1 :=
ℓÖ
𝑖=1
𝑒(𝑀𝑖, pk𝑖) = 𝑒(𝑍1,𝑌2)
3 : 𝑏2 := 𝑒(𝑌1,𝑔2) = 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑌2)
4 : 𝑏3 := 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑉2) = 𝑒(𝑌1, 𝐻2(𝑡))
5 : return 𝑏1 ∧𝑏2 ∧𝑏3
Figure 9: Tag-based equivalence class signature (TBEQ)
from [56] (𝐻2 : {0, 1}∗→G2 is a hash function modelled as a
random oracle and we assume that pp is given as an implicit
input to all the algorithms).
on the message (𝑔1, 𝐻1(nonce)rsk−1), i.e., the canonical represen-
tation of the equivalence class [4]. We remark that the random
message produced from the NIBS is 𝜇:= 𝐻1(nonce)rsk−1, and the
first component of the message vector above is fixed to 𝑔1 for the
recipient to be able to compute exactly one blind signature from a
pre-signature. The security of this construction is proven in the ran-
dom oracle model (ROM) and generic group model (GGM), which
mainly follows from the unforgeability of the TBEQ scheme.
Our approach for constructing VEBS is to combine the NIBS
scheme of Hanzlik [54] with ElGamal-like techniques for construct-
ing VES introduced by Boneh et al. [12]. More precisely, note that
the pre-signature of the NIBS scheme is a fresh TBEQ signature,
which is of the form (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2) (see Figure 9), and where only
the first element 𝑍1 includes traces of the secret key sk and message
𝑀. Therefore, to derive VEBS construction out of this, it suffices to
apply ElGamal encryption to 𝑍1 component in order to hide it while
still maintaining the efficient pairing-based verification mechanism
(as done in [12] for BLS-based VES construction). However, in order
to maintain efficient verifiability of the encrypted signatures we
need to add an additional group element and pairing check to our
construction. We detail our scheme in Figure 11.
Setup(1𝜆)
1 : pp ←TBEQ.Setup(1𝜆)
2 : return pp := (𝑞, G1, G2, G𝑇,𝑒,𝑔1,𝑔2)
KGen(pp)
1 : (skTBEQ, pkTBEQ ) ←TBEQ.KGen(ℓ:= 2)
2 : return (sk := skTBEQ, pk := pkTBEQ )
RKGen(pp)
1 : 𝑥←$ Z𝑞, 𝑦= 𝑔𝑥
1
2 : return (rsk := 𝑥, rpk := 𝑦)
Issue(sk, rpk,𝑡)
1 : nonce ←$ {0, 1}𝜆,ℎ:= 𝐻1(nonce)
2 : psig ←TBEQ.Sign(sk, (rpk,ℎ),𝑡)
3 : return (psig, nonce)
Obtain(rsk, pk, (psig, nonce),𝑡)
1 : if TBEQ.Vf(pk, (rpk, 𝐻1(nonce)),𝑡, psig) = 0 then
2 :
return ⊥
3 : 𝜎←TBEQ.ChgRep((rpk, 𝐻1(nonce)), psig, rsk−1, pk)
4 : 𝜇:= 𝐻1(nonce)rsk−1
5 : return (𝜇, 𝜎)
Vf(pk,𝑡, 𝜇, 𝜎)
1 : return TBEQ.Vf(pk, (𝑔1, 𝜇),𝑡, 𝜎)
Figure 10: NIBS construction based on TBEQ signature
scheme from [54] (𝐻1 : {0, 1}∗→G1 is a hash function mod-
elled as a random oracle).
Similar to the underlying NIBS scheme of Hanzlik [54], we prove
security in ROM and GGM. We establish the correctness and secu-
rity of our construction with the theorem below, which we prove
in Appendix C.1.
Theorem 4.1. If the construction from Figure 9 is secure, then the
VEBS construction described in Figure 11, is secure according to Defi-
nition 4.5.
Remark 1. We note that an alternative approach to construct NIBS-
based VEBS is for signer to compute rpk′ := rpk + apk and run Issue
using rpk′ instead of rpk. In this case, the client would need both ask
and rsk to execute the Obtain algorithm. While this approach may
be more efficient than ours given in Figure 11, we have not established
its security, and we leave it as an interesting future work.
Performance evaluation. Our implementation 3 is written in Rust
and leverages the bls12_381 crate to realize the SPS-based VEBS
construction given in Section 4.1. Performance was evaluated on an
Apple MacBook Pro with an M4 processor and 16GB RAM. Results
in Table 2 show average runtimes over 100 iterations. Our findings
demonstrate the practicality of our construction, with all operations
taking less than 15 milliseconds on a commodity hardware, and the
encrypted signature 𝜔being less than 1 kilobyte in size.

Castejon-Molina et al.
AKGen(1𝜆)
1 : 𝑥←$ Z𝑞, 𝑦:= 𝑔𝑥
1
2 : return (ask := 𝑥, apk := 𝑦)
VESign(sk, apk, b
𝑚)
1 : parse b
𝑚:= (rpk,𝑡)
2 : nonce ←$ {0, 1}𝜆,ℎ:= 𝐻1(nonce)
3 : psig ←TBEQ.Sign(sk, (rpk,ℎ),𝑡)
4 : parse psig := (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2)
5 : 𝑟←$ Z𝑞,𝜍:= 𝑔𝑟
1,𝑌′
2 := 𝑌𝑟
2
6 : 𝜈:= (apk)𝑟, e𝜔:= 𝑍1 · 𝜈
7 : return 𝜔:= (nonce, e𝜔,𝜍,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑌′
2,𝑉2)
Resolve(ask, pk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
1 : parse b
𝑚:= (rpk,𝑡), 𝜔:= (nonce, e𝜔,𝜍,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑌′
2,𝑉2)
2 : 𝑍1 := e𝜔· 𝜍−ask
3 : return psig := (𝑍1,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑉2)
VEVer(pk, apk, b
𝑚,𝜔)
1 : parse pk := (pk1, pk2), b
𝑚:= (rpk,𝑡)
2 : parse 𝜔:= (nonce, e𝜔,𝜍,𝑌1,𝑌2,𝑌′
2,𝑉2)
3 : 𝑏1 := 𝑒(rpk, pk1) · 𝑒(𝐻1(nonce), pk2) · 𝑒(apk,𝑌′
2 ) = 𝑒(e𝜔,𝑌2)
4 : 𝑏2 := 𝑒(𝑌1,𝑔2) = 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑌2)
5 : 𝑏3 := 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑉2) = 𝑒(𝑌1, 𝐻2(𝑡))
6 : 𝑏4 := 𝑒(𝜍,𝑌2) = 𝑒(𝑔1,𝑌′
2 )
7 : return 𝑏1 ∧𝑏2 ∧𝑏3 ∧𝑏4
Figure 11: VEBS construction based on TBEQ signature
scheme (𝐻1 and 𝐻2 are the hash functions from Figure 9).
Table 2: Performance evaluation of SPS-based VEBS. Time is
shown in milliseconds and size in bytes.
VESign
VEVer
Resolve + Obtain
|𝜔|
3 ms
6 ms
13 ms
912B
5
VES/VEBS in Existing Applications
Our goal when designing VES/VEBS for the blockchain setting is
to produce a primitive that we can use as a replacement of AS
in Figure 1. To showcase the utility of our approach, we first de-
scribe a blueprint for a fair exchange using AS and VES, which is
followed by a discussion of how this blueprint can be used in many
applications in the blockchain.
Fair exchange blueprint. The fair exchange blueprint is illustrated
in Figure 12. Bob, first prepares message 𝑚𝐴before sending it to
Alice. The preparation for the Alice’s message is modeled by the
MsgEncode function, depends on the signature scheme required
by the application. After receiving the processed message, Alice
verifiably encrypts a (possibly blind) signature with respect to a
fresh encryption key apk. If the ciphertext correctly verifies, Bob
produces a presignature on message 𝑚𝐵, using apk as statement.
If the presignature is valid, Alice adapts it and submits the tuple
(𝑚𝐵, 𝜎𝐵). Bob observes the transaction, and extracts the decryption
3https://github.com/etairi/VEBS
Alice: (sk𝐴, pk𝐵,𝑚𝐵)
Bob: (sk𝐵, pk𝐴,𝑚𝐴,𝑚𝐵)
VES: b
𝑚:= 𝑚𝐴
VEBS: (b
𝑚,𝜏) ←MsgEncode(pk,𝑚𝐴)
b
𝑚
(ask, apk) ←AKGen(1𝜆)
𝜔←VESign(sk, apk, b
𝑚)
(apk,𝜔)
assert VEVer(pk𝐴, apk, b
𝑚,𝜔) = 1
˜𝜎𝐵←PreSign(sk𝐵,𝑚𝐵, apk)
˜𝜎𝐵
assert PreVf(pk𝐵,𝑚𝐵, apk, ˜𝜎𝐵) = 1
𝜎𝐵:= Adapt( ˜𝜎𝐵, ask)
Submit (𝑚𝐵, 𝜎𝐵)
Blockchain
Read 𝜎𝐵
ask := Ext(𝜎𝐵, ˜𝜎𝐵, apk)
b𝜎←Resolve(ask, pk𝐴, b
𝑚,𝜔)
VES: 𝜎𝐴:= b𝜎
VEBS: 𝜎𝐴←SigDecode(pk,𝜏, b𝜎)
Figure 12: Blueprint on how to run fair exchange of two
signatures on the blockchain with adaptor signatures and
VES/VEBS.
key ask from the tuple ( ˜𝜎𝐵, 𝜎𝐵). Finally, Bob uses ask and 𝜏to
decrypt the signature 𝜎𝐴for message 𝑚𝐴.
Next, we discuss how this blueprint can be used in several
blockchain applications, as summarized in Table 3.
Anonymous credentials. Anonymous credentials [14, 17–19, 27,
38, 67, 68, 79, 80] are cryptographic protocols that allow users to first
register with a registration authority in order to obtain a credential.
Such a credential can be used afterwards by the users to (anony-
mously) prove statements about themselves (e.g., being an adult
or possessing a valid driving license) in order to access a service.
Nowadays, users often pay to obtain credentials such as physical
IDs, or driver’s licenses. Moreover, countries, like those in the EU,
with the EUID [72] are planning to deploy digital identity systems.
In this setting, credential issuers in digital systems may also require
payment to issue a credential, resulting in a process equivalent
to purchasing a signature from the issuer. Many of the existing
anonymous credential protocols rely on digital signature schemes
based on pairings (e.g., BLS and structure-preserving signatures).
Consequently, a fair exchange between a blockchain transaction
and a credential works exactly as the blueprint in Figure 12. More
notably, we have shown that a BLS construction (Boneh et al. [12])
and a structure preserving signature (Hanser et al. [52]) are secure
instances of our revised VES.
Contingent payments. Contingent payments [6, 15, 20, 23, 33, 36,
46, 70, 86] enable the fair exchange of a transaction in the blockchain
and the decryption on verifiable ciphertext. We focus on the con-
crete case where the product is a digital signature on a message
(e.g., a notary’s attestation on a document) [46]. Although contin-
gent payment differ in the concrete instantiations of the building
blocks (e.g., encryption schemes and zero-knowledge proofs), they
follow the same blueprint: the seller encrypts the digital product
and attaches a zero-knowledge proof to convince the buyer that
the ciphertext contains the desired product. Upon verification, the
buyer buys the decryption key from the seller using some instance

Foundations of Verifiably Encrypted (Blind) Signatures
Table 3: Summary of applications that can be analyzed with VES and VEBS.
Application
𝑚𝐴
MsgEncode
SigDecode
VES/VEBS
Instantiation
Anonymous Credentials
credential’s attributes
N/A
N/A
VES
Boneh et al. [12] (Appendix B.6)
Hanser et al. [52] (Appendix B.7)
Contingent Payments
arbitrary message
N/A
N/A
VES