SCOUT-CT: Sound Constant-Time Outcome with Uncertainty
Tracking using multi-taint analysis
Damien Maier∗†, Jean-François Pasche∗, Maxim Golay∗†, Alexandre Duc∗
∗School of Engineering and Management Vaud
HES-SO University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland
Yverdon-les-Bains, Switzerland
alexandre.duc@heig-vd.ch
† School of Computer and Communication Sciences
EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
damien.maier@epfl.ch, maxim.golay@epfl.ch
Abstract—Side-channel attacks are an important
class of security exploits, in which an attacker gains
access to confidential data by observing information
inadvertently leaked by a system. Writing constant-
time code is a common defense against time-based
and microarchitectural side-channel attacks.
Many approaches have been proposed to auto-
matically verify that a program is constant-time.
Sound methods can detect all information leaks
but, to efficiently analyze large programs, most of
them rely on overapproximation which can yield
false alarms (i.e., reports of non-existent informa-
tion leaks). Each finding produced by such analyses
therefore requires manual inspection. Additionally,
most existing approaches do not perform binary-
level analysis and thus miss vulnerabilities intro-
duced by compilation.
In this paper, we present a novel sound analysis
for detecting information leaks under the constant-
time threat model. Compared with existing work,
our technique improves taint analysis by systemat-
ically tracking precision loss to determine whether
a detected information leak could be caused by
overapproximation. Findings for which no precision
loss is detected are reported as confirmed; as long
as they do not arise from dead code, confirmed
findings are guaranteed to be true and thus do not
require significant manual inspection. Only find-
ings with detected precision loss need classical hu-
man verification. Our analysis operates directly on
binary executables. We instantiate our technique
within the abstract interpretation framework and
provide a proof of correctness.
We implemented our approach in a prototype
tool, SCOUT-CT, and evaluated it on a bench-
mark of constant-time and non-constant-time pro-
grams, including real-world cryptographic imple-
mentations. Our results show that SCOUT-CT is
effective: our tool detected all 98 timing leaks in
This work was partly supported by armasuisse Science and
Technology, Cyber-Defense Campus, Switzerland and partly sup-
ported by the IICT institute of HEIG-VD/HES-SO, Switzerland.
the benchmark and automatically classified 97 as
confirmed findings that do not require significant
manual inspection.
Index Terms—timing attacks, constant-time verifi-
cation, abstract interpretation, binary analysis
1. Introduction
Computer systems can leak secret information
through subtle and unintended channels. The data
processed by a system can influence various externally
visible behaviors such as its execution time or its
memory access patterns. These so-called side-channels
can be monitored by an attacker to gain knowledge
about operations performed by the system, and ulti-
mately about the secret data it manipulates. Ensuring
that a system does not leak information through side-
channels is an inherently difficult task.
1.1. Timing attacks
Timing attacks are a particularly prominent class
of side-channel attacks, where the attacker infers se-
cret information through timing measurements. Nu-
merous timing attacks have been demonstrated in
practice against real-world software. Timing attacks
can be classified into two different — but related
— categories, depending on whether the attacker (i)
measures the execution time of the victim system,
or (ii) measures the execution time of its own oper-
ations running on hardware shared with the victim
system [1].
Attacks belonging to the first category target pro-
grams whose execution time depends on secret data. A
well-known example is the timing attack presented in
1996 by Kocher [2], which targets modular exponen-
tiation implementations. As an illustration, Listing 1
shows a simple implementation of modular exponen-
tiation that is vulnerable to such an attack: at line 4,
the if statement is only entered when the exponent
bit is 1, causing the duration of a loop iteration to
depend on the (typically secret) exponent. Various

1 r ←1
2 for b ←bits of e from MSB to LSB do:
3
r ←(r · r) mod n
4
if b = 1 then:
5
r ←(r · a) mod n
Listing 1. Square-and-multiply algorithm.
Computes r = ae mod n.
effective attacks leveraging this technique remotely
against real-world software were demonstrated [3], [4].
Other attacks exploit the fact that the execution
time of some instructions depends on the value of
their inputs. A well-known example is the KyberSlash
Attack [5] by Bernstein et al.
The second category of attacks exploits the fact
that two programs that use the same resources con-
currently influence each other’s execution time. By
measuring timing variations of its own program, an
attacker can gain knowledge about the usage of shared
resources by a victim program, which reveals informa-
tion about the computations performed by the vic-
tim, and ultimately about secret data it manipulates.
This type of attack is particularly relevant in multi-
tenant environments such as cloud computing plat-
forms, where an attacker can easily run its own code
on hardware shared with a victim program [6].
Prominent examples of such attacks are cache at-
tacks [7], [8], where the attacker uses timing mea-
surements to probe the state of a cache shared with
the victim program to learn about its memory ac-
cess patterns. A well-known instance of this attack
targets implementations of cryptographic algorithms
such as AES, which use substitution boxes stored in
memory [9]. Listing 2 presents a typical vulnerable
substitution box implementation. At line 6, the ad-
dress accessed in the sbox array depends on the value
of input; this address can be inferred by an attacker
monitoring the cache state.
1 char sbox[256] = {
2
/* ... */
3 };
4
5 char sub_byte(char input) {
6
return sbox[input];
7 }
Listing 2. S-box implementation.
Although the attack illustrated above targets ex-
plicit data memory accesses (i.e., memory accesses
caused by load instructions in the victim program),
other cache attacks monitor memory accesses to the
code segment of the victim program itself, and thus
enable tracing of execution paths [7].
1.2. Automated constant-time verification
To protect their software against timing attacks,
developers strive to ensure that secret data does not
influence attacker-observable behaviors. The dominant
technique to achieve this goal is constant-time (CT)
programming [10]–[19]. A constant-time program is
one where secret data influences neither
•
the condition of any jump instruction, nor
•
the address of any memory access.
Such programs produce execution paths and mem-
ory access patterns that are independent of secret
data, and are therefore immune to the different types
of timing attacks described above. Some authors [11],
[14], [20] extend this threat-model to also require that
secret data does not influence the inputs of variable-
time instructions.
Writing constant-time programs is however a noto-
riously difficult task [20], and therefore having a tool
that automatically detects CT violations, or proves
their absence, is desirable.
Many approaches have been proposed for auto-
mated constant-time verification; these approaches
differ in the reliability guarantees they offer and their
ability to scale to real-world software. We discuss the
various techniques used by automatic CT verification
tools in Section 3.
Key characteristics of CT analyses are soundness
and completeness.
•
Sound approaches reason about all possible
executions of the tested program, and thus
guarantee that no actual information leak goes
undetected (no false negatives).
•
Complete approaches only take into account
executions that can actually happen, and thus
guarantee that all reported information leaks
are actual leaks (no false positives).
Those two properties are often mutually exclusive:
due to undecidability, no terminating automated tool
that verifies programs of arbitrary size can be both
sound and complete [21]. Consequently, existing CT
analysis tools can be classified into three categories:
1)
tools that trade soundness for scalability (i.e.,
perform underapproximation) and thus may
miss existing leaks [15]–[19], [22]–[29];
2)
tools that trade completeness for scalabil-
ity (i.e., perform overapproximation) and
thus may report non-existing leaks [11]–[13],
[30]–[33];
3)
tools that are both sound and complete, but
are inherently more computationally expen-
sive and thus have a lower ability to scale to
real-world software [10], [14], [34].
Approaches belonging to the first category can be
useful to discover information leaks, but they cannot
guarantee detection of all of them. Developers who
want to ensure that all leaks are discovered are left
with no satisfactory solution: they must either resort
to tools from the third category, which suffer from
scalability issues, or to tools from the second category,
which require manual inspection of all reported find-
ings to discard false positives.
Another important property of tools for automated
CT verification is the ability to analyze programs
provided as compiled binaries. Analyzing binaries is
typically challenging, especially for static approaches,
and thus many existing tools [11]–[14], [30]–[32] oper-
ate on intermediate representations (IRs). However, it
has been shown that timing leaks can be introduced

during compilation [10], so analyzing binaries instead
of IRs is necessary to ensure that all CT violations are
found.
1.3. Our contribution
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for
automated constant-time verification that improves
the state of the art with respect to these issues.
We present a binary-level analysis that is sound
(cannot miss violations) and scalable through overap-
proximation, but whose key novelty is that it provides
guarantees that reduce the manual effort required to
discard false positives.
Our analysis automatically classifies findings into
one of two categories:
•
Potential CT violations that can be spurious
alarms and require manual verification.
•
Confirmed CT violations that can only be spu-
rious alarms if they are located in unreachable
code (dead code). As long as there exists at
least one feasible execution reaching the pro-
gram point associated with a confirmed viola-
tion, the violation is guaranteed to be a true
positive.
Consequently, contrary to existing overapproximation-
based tools that require manual verification of all find-
ings, the user of our tool only needs to manually verify
the findings classified as potential. Confirmed findings
simply require checking that they are not located in
dead code, which is a much easier task.
Our approach builds on top of the “static taint
analysis” idea used in VirtualCert [12], CacheS [33],
and the work of Blazy et al. [13]: we follow the
control-flow graph of the program, propagating a taint
whose source is the secret input across assignments
and operations; tainted jump conditions and memory
accesses are reported as CT violations. We extend this
approach with the following features:
•
We use a multi-taint system that enables over-
approximation tracking for distinguishing con-
firmed findings from potential ones. Initially,
the analysis propagates a red taint whose
source is the secret input. Red-tainted data is
known to be secret-dependent. When overap-
proximation is performed, data in the resulting
state is marked with an orange taint, to denote
that it may be secret-dependent. CT violations
caused by red-tainted data are confirmed leaks,
while those caused by orange-tainted data are
potential leaks.
•
We use a path-sensitive analysis, that is, for
each program point we maintain separate state
information for each feasible execution path
reaching that point. This enables precise anal-
ysis of loops, where each iteration is analyzed
separately. For scalability, we limit the number
of paths tracked to a user-defined threshold and
compute a sound overapproximation of possible
states when this threshold is exceeded.
•
We
track
the
concrete
values
of
input-
independent data during the analysis, by sim-
ulating instruction executions on them. This
enables precise handling of indirect memory
accesses.
We implement our approach in a prototype tool
named SCOUT-CT, and make it publicly available.
We evaluate SCOUT-CT on a benchmark suite
composed of various CT and non-CT programs,
including real-world cryptographic implementations.
Our results confirm that our approach effectively
scales to real-world implementations. SCOUT-CT suc-
cessfully analyzes all programs of our benchmark in a
reasonable time, reports all known leaks, and classifies
almost all of them as confirmed CT violations.
We
compare
the
performance
of
SCOUT-CT
against two state-of-the-art tools: Microwalk [16] (com-
plete, not sound) and Binsec/Rel [10], [34] (sound and
complete). The results confirm the usefulness of the
new trade-off we propose: while our tool offers weaker
guarantees regarding false positives, it scales soundly
to larger programs than Binsec/Rel, with execution
times comparable to Microwalk.
Overall, our contributions are the following:
•
We
propose
a
novel
approach
for
auto-
mated constant-time verification that is sound,
binary-level, path-sensitive, and tracks overap-
proximation to reduce the manual verification
effort.
•
We instantiate our approach in the abstract
interpretation framework, and prove its cor-
rectness.
•
We implement our approach in a prototype
tool named SCOUT-CT, and make it publicly
available.
•
We evaluate SCOUT-CT on a benchmark suite,
demonstrating the effectiveness of our ap-
proach on real-world implementations, and we
compare its performance against two state-of-
the-art tools.
Roadmap. In Section 2, we introduce static taint
analysis and abstract interpretation. We discuss re-
lated work in Section 3. We motivate our work in
Section 4 using meaningful examples. We formalize
our analysis in Section 5 and prove its correctness in
Section 6. We present the implementation of SCOUT-
CT in Section 7. We evaluate our tool on a benchmark
and compare it to existing work in Section 8. Finally,
we conclude in Section 9.
2. Background
In this section we present abstract interpretation,
the mathematical framework in which our analysis
is instantiated. We then introduce static taint anal-
ysis, the core approach used in existing abstract-
interpretation-based tools for the automatic detection
of CT violations.

2.1. Abstract interpretation
Abstract interpretation is a framework for con-
structing static analyses, introduced by Cousot and
Cousot [35], [36]. Its key idea is to reason not about all
concrete program states explicitly (which is typically
not feasible), but about a simpler overapproximation
that can be computed effectively.
A common goal of abstract interpretation is to
overapproximate the collecting semantics that com-
putes all reachable program states at each program
point.
Formally, define a concrete state as a mapping from
each program variable to some property of interest (for
instance, the concrete value of the variable). Let Σ♭
denote the set of concrete states. A concrete states
assignment is a mapping µ♭: points →P(Σ♭) from
each program point to a set of program states.
The concrete transformer for the collecting seman-
tics is the function F♭that receives a concrete states
assignment µ♭
1, simulates one execution step of the
program for each state, and returns the updated con-
crete states assignment µ♭
2. Repeatedly applying the
concrete transformer on an initial states assignment
F♭(F♭(. . . (µ♭) . . . )) until no new states are discovered
is equivalent to performing an exhaustive exploration
of all program executions. That is, the set of reachable
states is the least fixed point of F♭.
As explicitly computing the least fixed point of F♭
is typically intractable, abstract interpretation con-
sists instead in performing the analysis on a simplified
representation of program states, called an abstract
domain. Each abstract state in the abstract domain
represents a set of concrete states. The analysis is
performed on a new abstract semantics that operates
on abstract states.
Overall, the key components of an abstract inter-
pretation are:
•
a set Σ♯of possible abstract states,
•
a concretization function γ : Σ♯→P(Σ♭)
that determines the set of concrete states rep-
resented by an abstract state,
•
an abstraction function α : P(Σ♭) →Σ♯that
maps a set of concrete states to the minimal
abstract state representing them,
•
an abstract transformer F♯that receives a col-
lection of abstract states and simulates one
execution step for each of them, according to
the abstract semantics.
If the abstract domain satisfies some mathematical
conditions (namely, α and γ form a Galois connection,
F♯is a sound approximation of F♭), then the least
fixed point of F♯overapproximates the least fixed
point of F♭(see, for instance Propositions 24 and 25
of [36]).
Concretely, computing the least fixed point of F♯
and applying γ to the result yields a superset of all
reachable program states. The least fixed point of
F♯can be computed using Kildall’s worklist algo-
rithm [37].
We will define the concrete domain used for our
analysis in Section 5.2, its abstract domain in Sec-
tion 5.3, and the abstraction and concretization func-
tions in Section 6.
2.2. Static taint analysis for CT
We now present a minimal abstract-interpretation-
based analysis for finding CT violations. Existing tools
based on abstract interpretation like CacheS [33], Vir-
tualCert [12] and the work of Blazy et al. [13] all follow
this fundamental approach.
For this analysis, a concrete state maps each vari-
able to:
•
a concrete value, and
•
whether the variable is secret-dependent or not.
The concrete semantics follows an intuitive def-
inition: concrete values are computed according to
the meaning of program instructions, and a variable
becomes secret-dependent if it is assigned the result of
an operation that itself depends on a secret-dependent
variable.
Note that this notion of secret-dependency is syn-
tactic and not based on whether the final value actu-
ally varies with the secret. A value computed from
secret-dependent data is always treated as secret-
dependent even when it is constant; for example, if
a is secret-dependent, then b = a ⊕a is always 0, but
we still consider b to be secret-dependent.
The goal of the analysis is to overapproximate the
secret-dependency property of the variables. To this
end, the analysis propagates a taint whose source is
the secret program input.
An abstract state maps each variable to either
tainted or untainted. An untainted variable repre-
sents a non-secret-dependent variable, while a tainted
variable represents a variable that may be secret-
dependent. At the beginning of the analysis, all vari-
ables are untainted, except for the secret input variable
in the entry point.
The abstract semantics of non-jump operations is
straightforward: if any operand is tainted, the result
is tainted; otherwise, it is untainted. The abstract ex-
ecution of a conditional jump simply consists of prop-
agating the abstract state to both successors. When a
program point can be reached through multiple paths
(i.e., has multiple predecessors), the abstract states
from each incoming path are soundly merged: if a
variable is tainted in any of the incoming abstract
states, it is tainted in the merged abstract state.
As an example, consider the program depicted in
Listing 3. The variable secret denotes a secret input
of the program, while public is a public input. Both
memory accesses at lines 7 and 8 are CT violations,
as the address being accessed depends on the secret
value, at least for some values of public.
1 var1 = secret;
2 if (public) {
3
var2 = 0;
4 } else {
5
var2 = secret;
6 }
7 /* ... */ = array[var1];
8 /* ... */ = array[var2];
Listing 3. Tested program example.

The result of performing the static taint analysis
on this program is represented in Listing 4. At line
1, var1 becomes tainted. Similarly, at line 5, var2
becomes tainted. At line 6, the two branches of the
if-else merge. As var1 is tainted in both the then and
else branches, it naturally remains tainted after the
merge. Regarding var2, it is untainted in the then
branch but tainted in the else branch; to ensure a
sound overapproximation, it is marked as tainted after
the merge.
1 var1 = secret;
2 if (public) {
3
var2 = 0;
4 } else {
5
var2 = secret;
6 }
7 /* ... */ = array[var1];
8 /* ... */ = array[var2];
Listing 4. Simple taint analysis result. Red, underlined names
denote tainted variables.
The analysis finally reports all tainted memory
accesses or jump conditions as CT violations. In this
example, both memory accesses at lines 7 and 8 are
reported.
3. Related work
Previous work [20], [38], [39] lists and compares
tools for automated constant-time verification.
Existing tools vary in the threat model they
consider. We first discuss those threat models and
then specifically compare analysis techniques for the
constant-time threat model.
3.1. Threat models
Some tools [40]–[42] simply follow a black-box ap-
proach that consists in measuring the execution time
of many runs of the tested program and using sta-
tistical methods to determine whether those measure-
ments correlate with the secret data. Others [43]–[48]
ensure that whenever a conditional jump depends on
secret data, both branches result in the same execution
times. Those approaches do not account for attack
scenarios presented in Section 1.1 where the attacker
measures its own execution time on shared hardware.
Most tools [10]–[19] use the constant-time threat
model defined in Section 1.2 that forbids secret-
dependent jump conditions and memory accesses.
Some approaches specifically focus on cache at-
tacks [22], [25], [32], [33] and use various relaxed
versions of the constant-time threat model that al-
low some secret-dependent memory accesses which are
believed to be safe from cache attacks. For instance,
as memory accesses targeting the same cache line
typically have the same effect on the cache state, those
tools may allow secret-dependent memory accesses as
long as only the lower bits of the accessed address
depend on secret data.
Finally, some tools [49]–[53] extend the constant-
time threat model to speculative execution.
TABLE 1. Constant-time
verification approaches.
Ref.
Tool
Input
Static taint analysis
[12]
VirtualCert
Macha
[13]
Blazy et al.
C#minorb
[33]
CacheS
Binary
Off-the-shelf verifier
[14]
ct-verif
LLVM
Symbolic execution
[32]
CaSym
LLVM
[11]
Pitchfork
LLVM
[10]
Binsec/rel
Binary
Dynamic taint analysis
[18]
ctgrind
Binary
[22]
CacheD
Binary
[24]
TimeCop
Binary
[19]
Abacus
Binary
[25]
Catype
Binary
[26]
MemSan
Binary
Comparison of execution traces
[27]
Stacco
Binary
[15]
DATA
Binary
[16]
Microwalk
Binary
[28]
Anableps
Binary
[17]
ct-fuzz
Binary
[29]
CacheQL
Binary
a Last IR used by CompCert [54].
b Second IR used by CompCert [54].
3.2. Approaches
for
the
constant-time
threat model
We focus our discussion on tools that forbid secret-
dependent jump conditions or memory accesses, that
is, tools for the constant-time threat model or its
variants that only target cache attacks.
The common problem all those tools aim to solve
is the automatic detection of information flows from a
source — the secret data — to sinks — the attacker-
observable behaviors. We classify existing approaches
based on how they tackle this problem. We briefly
describe these approaches below. The results of our
classification are presented in Table 1.
Static taint analysis. Those tools use the technique
presented in Section 2.2.
Off-the-shelf verifier. This approach consists in
building a product-program whose correctness is
equivalent to the constant-time property of the tested
program, and using an off-the-shelf software verifier to
prove the correctness of the product program.
Symbolic execution. This approach consists in ex-
ecuting the program on symbolic inputs, building
symbolic expressions to represent results of input-
dependent computations, and systematically exploring
execution paths. Whenever a symbolic expression e
reaches an information sink, the tool solves an SMT
formula to check whether e can take different values
depending on secret inputs.

Dynamic taint analysis. This approach consists in
performing real executions of the tested program while
propagating a taint whose source is the secret data.
Comparison of execution traces. This approach
consists in performing real executions of the tested
program on different secret inputs, producing execu-
tion traces capturing the attacker-observable behav-
iors, and comparing those traces to find evidence of
information leaks.
4. Motivation
This section presents a high-level, intuitive descrip-
tion of the novel aspects of our analysis.
We proceed incrementally, building on top of the
minimal taint analysis approach presented in Sec-
tion 2.2. First, we introduce our multi-taint system
and show how it enables overapproximation tracking.
Then, we add the second key feature of our approach:
path sensitivity.
Note that, although for the sake of clarity we
present our approach on high-level pseudo-code, our
analysis is performed on compiled code. What are
referred to as “variables” in this section actually are
registers and memory bytes in the real analysis.
4.1. Multi-Taint System for Overapproxi-
mation Tracking
The main downside of the classic taint analysis
presented in Section 2.2 is that it may produce false
positives due to overapproximation. Consequently, all
reported findings require manual inspection.
To address this problem, we augment the analysis
with a double-taint system that enables precision loss
tracking. In this new abstract domain, tainted vari-
ables are either associated with a red taint or an orange
taint. The source of the red taint is the secret input;
this taint represents data that is guaranteed to be
secret-dependent. When state merges are performed,
the orange taint is used to represent variables that may
depend on secret data due to overapproximation.
Listing 5 illustrates the results of this enhanced
analysis on the program of Listing 3. Variables var1
and var2 become red-tainted at lines 1 and 5, respec-
tively. At line 6, during the merge of the two branches,
var1 remains red-tainted, as it is red-tainted in both
branches and thus guaranteed to depend on secret
data. However, var2 is red-tainted in the else branch
but untainted in the then branch; consequently, it is
marked as orange-tainted after the merge, indicating
that it may depend on secret data due to overapprox-
imation.
At line 7, the memory access is flagged as a con-
firmed CT violation, since the address being accessed
is red-tainted. At line 8, however, the memory access
is reported as a potential CT violation, as the address
is only orange-tainted. Only the second violation re-
quires manual inspection, thereby reducing the ana-
lyst’s workload.
1 var1 = secret;
2 if (public) {
3
var2 = 0;
4 } else {
5
var2 = secret;
6 }
7 /* ... */ = array[var1];
8 /* ... */ = array[...
var2];
Listing 5. Multi-taint analysis result. Red, underlined names
denote red-tainted variables. Orange, dotted-underlined names
denote orange-tainted variables.
4.2. Path Sensitivity
The second key feature of our analysis is path
sensitivity.
As a motivational example, consider Listing 6,
which represents the result of an analysis with the
multi-taint system but without path sensitivity. When
the body of the loop is analyzed for the first time,
array1[0] becomes red-tainted at line 2. However, the
analysis then goes back to line 1 and merges the status
coming from the first iteration with the initial status
before the loop. As array1[0] is untainted before
the loop and red-tainted after the first iteration, it
becomes orange-tainted after the merge.
Consequently, the memory access at line 4 is re-
ported as only a potential CT violation, even though
it is an actual violation.
1 for(i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
2
array1[i] = secret;
3 }
4 /* ... */ = array2[.......
array1[0]];
Listing 6. Multi-taint analysis result, without path sensitivity.
To improve precision, we introduce two enhance-
ments to the analysis.
•
First, instead of mapping each program point
to a single abstract state, the abstract domain
now maps each program point to a set of ab-
stract states. When a program point has mul-
tiple predecessors, the abstract semantics asso-
ciates to it the union of states coming from each
predecessor. Only when the number of states
associated to a program point exceeds a user-
defined threshold are states soundly merged.
•
Second, the analysis keeps track of concrete
values of variables that do not depend on the
program inputs. An abstract state now maps
each variable to either the red taint (secret
dependent, unknown value), the orange taint
(possibly secret dependent, unknown value),
the new green taint (not secret dependent, un-
known value), or a concrete value (not secret
dependent, known value).
Tracking the concrete values enables correct han-
dling of indirect memory accesses. It also improves
precision for conditional jumps: when the condition
evaluates to a concrete value, the abstract state is only
propagated to the taken branch; when it evaluates to
a taint, both branches are taken as in the non-path-
sensitive analysis.

Capping the number of abstract states per pro-
gram point prevents an exponential blow-up of the
analysis cost and thereby ensures its scalability, at the
inevitable cost of some precision loss.
With path sensitivity, analyzing the program of
Listing 7 results in line 3 (end of the loop body, after
increment of i) being associated with three abstract
states:
•
One where i is 1, and array1[0] is red-tainted.
•
One
where
i
is
2,
and
array1[0]
and
array1[1] are red-tainted.
•
One where i is 3, and array1[0], array1[1],
and array1[2] are red-tainted.
Finally, the last state is propagated to line 4, pro-
viding a precise description of the concrete state at
this point, and a confirmed CT violation is reported.
1 for(i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
2
array1[i] = secret;
3 }
4 /* ... */ = array2[array1[0]];
Listing 7. Multi-taint analysis result, with path sensitivity.
4.3. Confirmed and potential leaks with
path sensitivity
Whenever an attacker-observable (condition of a
jump instruction, address of a memory access, or
operand of a variable-time instruction) is red- or
orange-tainted, the analysis reports a CT violation.
Additionally, when such an observable is red-tainted in
all abstract states associated with the program point,
the violation is reported as confirmed.
CT violations reported by our analysis are guaran-
teed to be a superset of all actual leaks in the program.
Moreover, when a CT violation is reported as con-
firmed it is guaranteed to be an actual leak, assuming
that there exists at least one feasible execution reaching
the violation.
The complete proof is given in Section 6.3. Intu-
itively, the argument goes as follows:
1)
The analysis produces a sound overapprox-
imation of secret-dependency, and thus if a
variable is secret-dependent in the concrete
domain, it is tainted (red or orange) in at least
one abstract state.
2)
If a variable is red-tainted in all abstract
states associated with a program point, then
it is secret-dependent in all concrete states
represented by those abstract states. As the
abstract states overapproximate the concrete
states, either there exists no concrete state for
this program point, or the variable is secret-
dependent in all concrete states.
5. Formalization
In this section, we formalize our algorithm. Sec-
tion 5.1 introduces the program model. Section 5.2
presents the concrete domain; this part formalizes the
conventional secret-dependency notion introduced in
Section 2.2 and is inspired from previous work [13].
The core novelty is presented in Section 5.3, where we
define the abstract domain of our analysis.
5.1. Notation and program model
This section formalizes the program representation
used to define our analysis. Our goal here is to describe
a collection of mathematical objects for modelling the
code (syntax) of any program. Our model is general
enough to represent programs written in any assembly
language. We also introduce notation that will be used
in the next sections.
5.1.1. Miscellaneous notation. For some set S, we
use P(S) to denote the power set of S. We use B ≜
{0, . . . , 255} to denote the set of possible values that
can be stored in a byte.
5.1.2. Program states. We use B to denote the set
of architectural bytes of the machine being modeled.
The set B contains any memory unit whose value
can be read or written by a program instruction. In
particular, it includes each byte of the main memory
and of each register.
For some set V of possible values, a state σ : B →V
maps each architectural byte to an element of V . The
set V will be instantiated in the next sections, when
defining concrete and abstract states.
Consider some architectural byte b ∈B, some tuple
of architectural bytes B ∈Bn, and some value v ∈V .
We use
•
σ[b] to denote the element of V associated to
architectural byte b by state σ;
•
σ[B] to denote the tuple (σ[b1], . . . , σ[bn])
where B = (b1, . . . , bn);
•
σ[b 7→v] to denote the state identical to σ
except that b is now mapped to v.
5.1.3. Instructions. We use I to denote the set of all
instructions that can appear in a program. An element
of I is one of the following forms:
•
⟨compute, f, I, o⟩where f : Bn →B performs
some computation, I ∈Bn are the input bytes,
and o ∈B is the output byte.
•
⟨load, f, S, d⟩where f : Bn →B describes how
to compute the source address, S ∈Bn are the
bytes involved in computing the source address,
and d ∈B is the destination byte.
•
⟨store, f, D, s⟩where f : Bn →B describes how
to compute the destination address, D ∈Bn
are the bytes involved in computing the desti-
nation address, and s ∈B is the source byte.
•
⟨branch, g, I, T, F⟩where g : Bn →{true, false}
is the branch condition, I ∈Bn are the bytes
involved in the branch condition, and T, F ∈
points are the target program points for true
and false branches respectively.
Clearly, any real assembly instruction can be en-
coded in this schema, possibly by breaking it down
into multiple instructions.

Assignments, arithmetic operations or logical op-
erations can be represented using the compute in-
struction form. Indirect memory accesses can be rep-
resented using the load and store instruction forms.
Jumps and conditional branches can be represented
using the branch instruction form.
5.1.4. Program. A program is a tuple (points, instr)
where:
•
points is the set of program points (i.e., instruc-
tion addresses),
•
instr : points →I is a mapping from each
program point to an instruction.
Let flow ⊆points × points denote the control-flow
relation of the program. We have (ℓ, ℓ′) ∈flow iff
•
instr(ℓ) = ⟨branch, g, I, T, F⟩and ℓ′ ∈{T, F},
or
•
instr(ℓ) ̸= ⟨branch, g, I, T, F⟩and ℓ′ is the next
program point in the program after ℓ.
The set points together with the relation flow form
the control-flow graph (CFG).
5.2. Concrete domain
This section formalizes the concrete semantics of
analyzed programs, that is, the actual behavior that
we will later approximate using abstract interpreta-
tion.
As the goal of our analysis is to track how secret
data propagates through program execution, we need
to incorporate the notion of secret-dependency in the
concrete semantics. To this end, we use the approach
proposed in Section 3.3 of [13], where each value in
the concrete domain is paired with a taint indicating
whether it was influenced by secret data or not.
The taint used in the present section should not be
confused with the multi-taint system used in the next
section for the abstract domain.
5.2.1. Concrete state. A concrete state σ♭: B →
B × {Sec, Pub} maps each architectural byte to
•
a concrete value, and
•
a taint indicating whether the value of the byte
is influenced by secret data or not.
We use Σ♭to denote the set of all such concrete
states.
Let a ∈B × {Sec, Pub} and A ∈(B × {Sec, Pub})n.
We use
•
a.val to denote the concrete value component
of a;
•
a.taint to denote the taint component of a;
•
A.val to denote the concrete value components
in A;
•
A.taint to denote the taint components in A.
5.2.2. Concrete semantics. We now define the ef-
fect of applying an instruction to a single program
state.
For any instruction i ∈I that is not a branching
instruction, the concrete semantics of i is the function
JiK♭: Σ♭→Σ♭that receives a program state and
applies the instruction i to it. We define it separately
for each type of instruction.
First,
consider
a
compute
instruction
⟨compute, f, I, o⟩. Its concrete semantics is to read
the values stored at bytes I, apply the function f
to them, and write the result to byte o. Regarding
secret-dependency, o becomes secret-dependent if any
of the input bytes I is secret-dependent.
Formally, we have:
J⟨compute, f, I, o⟩K♭(σ♭) ≜σ♭[o 7→(v, t)]
where
v = f(σ♭[I].val)
t =
(
Sec
if Sec ∈σ♭[I].taint
Pub
otherwise
Now, consider a load instruction ⟨load, f, S, d⟩. Its
concrete semantics is to read the values stored at bytes
S, apply the function f to them to obtain an address
a, read the value stored at address a, and write it
to byte d. Regarding secret-dependency, d becomes
secret-dependent if either the source address S or the
loaded value at address a is secret-dependent.
Formally, we have:
J⟨load, f, S, d⟩K♭(σ♭) ≜σ♭[d 7→(v, t)]
where
a = f(σ♭[S].val)
v = σ♭[a].val
t =
(
Sec
if Sec ∈σ♭[S].taint ∪{σ♭[a].taint}
Pub
otherwise
Finally, consider a store instruction ⟨store, f, D, s⟩.
Its concrete semantics is to read the values stored at
bytes D, apply the function f to them to obtain an
address a, read the value stored at byte s, and write it
at address a. Regarding secret-dependency, the value
stored at address a becomes secret-dependent if either
any of the address bytes D or the source byte s is
secret-dependent.
Formally, we have:
J⟨store, f, D, s⟩K♭(σ♭) ≜σ♭[a 7→(v, t)]
where
a = f(σ♭[D].val)
v = σ♭[s].val
t =
(
Sec
if Sec ∈σ♭[D].taint ∪{σ♭[s].taint}
Pub
otherwise

5.2.3. Concrete states propagation. The next
step is to define how sets of reachable states propagate
along edges of the control-flow graph.
For any pair of program points (ℓ, ℓ′), the concrete
semantics of the transition from ℓto ℓ′ is the function
J(ℓ, ℓ′)K♭: P(Σ♭) →P(Σ♭) that receives a set of reach-
able states at program point ℓ, applies the instruction
at ℓto each of them, and returns the resulting set of
states to be propagated to program point ℓ′.
If ℓcontains a compute, load, or store instruction,
then the instruction is s

[…middle truncated for length…]

ogram (entry program
point mapped to an abstract state representing the
initial program state, all other program points mapped
to the empty set).
The analysis computes the limit µ♯
∗≜limi→∞µ♯
i.
We will see in the next section that µ♯
∗is an overap-
proximation of all possible program behaviors.
6. Analysis correctness
In this section we define the abstraction and con-
cretization functions, that is, the formal relationship
between the concrete and abstract domain. We then
state and prove the correctness of our analysis.
6.1. Concretization function
The concretization function maps abstract ele-
ments to the set of concrete elements they represent.
We proceed incrementally, starting by describing how
a single abstract state is concretized, then lifting this
to sets of states, and finally defining how a mapping
from program points to sets of abstract states is con-
cretized.
We define the concretization function on states
¯γ : Σ♯→P(Σ♭). This function receives an abstract
state, and computes all the concrete states that it
can represent. The taint orange represents any con-
crete value, regardless of its secret-dependency status.
The taint red only represents concrete values that are
secret-dependent, while the taint green only represents
concrete values that are non-secret-dependent. A con-
crete value in the abstract domain represents the same,
non-secret-dependent value in the concrete domain.
Formally, we have:
¯γ(σ♯) ≜{σ♭∈Σ♭| ∀b ∈B, V (σ♯[b], σ♭[b])∧T(σ♯[b], σ♭[b])}
where V and T are predicates defined as follows:
V (x, y) ≡
(
y.val = x
if x ∈B
true
if x ∈{green, orange, red}
T(x, y) ≡









y.taint = Sec
if x = red
true
if x = orange
y.taint = Pub
if x = green
y.taint = Pub
if x ∈B
We can now define the concretization function
γ : P(Σ♯) →P(Σ♭) on sets of states by lifting the
concretization function on states. The function γ re-
ceives a set of abstract states and simply applies the
concretization function ¯γ to each of them.
Formally, let {σ♯
1, . . . , σ♯
n} ∈P(Σ♯). Then:
γ({σ♯
1, . . . , σ♯
n}) ≜¯γ(σ♯
1) ∪· · · ∪¯γ(σ♯
n)
Finally, we define the concretization function Γ :
M♯→M♭on states assignments by lifting the con-
cretization function on sets of states. The function Γ
receives a mapping from program points to sets of
abstract states, and applies the concretization function
γ at each program point.
Formally, let µ♯∈M♯and ℓ∈points. Then:
Γ(µ♯)[ℓ] ≜γ(µ♯[ℓ])
6.2. Abstraction function
The abstraction function maps a set of concrete
elements to the minimal abstract element that repre-
sents them. As with the concretization function, we
first define the abstraction of a single state, then lift
this to sets of states, and finally define the abstraction
of a mapping from program points to sets of concrete
states.
We define the abstraction function on states ¯α :
Σ♭→Σ♯. This function receives a concrete state,
and computes the minimal abstract state that repre-
sents it. Non-secret-dependent values are mapped to
the equivalent concrete value, while secret-dependent
values are mapped to the taint red.
Formally, let σ♭∈Σ♭and b ∈B. Then:
¯α(σ♭)[b] ≜
(
red
if σ♭[b].taint = Sec
σ♭[b].val
if σ♭[b].taint = Pub
We now define the abstraction function α
:
P(Σ♭) →P(Σ♯) on sets of states by lifting the abstrac-
tion function on states. This function receives a set of
concrete states, and applies the abstraction function
¯α to each of them.
Formally, let {σ♭
1, . . . , σ♭
n} ∈P(Σ♭). Then:
α({σ♭
1, . . . , σ♭
n}) ≜{¯α(σ♭
1), . . . , ¯α(σ♭
n)}
Finally, we define the abstraction function A :
M♭→M♯on states assignments by lifting the ab-
straction function on sets of states. Let µ♭∈M♭and
ℓ∈points. Then:
A(µ♭)[ℓ] ≜α(µ♭[ℓ])
6.3. Correctness
We can now state the theorem of soundness of
our analysis. It ensures that the analysis described
in Section 5.3 produces a result that correctly over-
approximates all possible behaviors of the analyzed
program, as defined in Section 5.2.
Theorem 1 (Soundness of the analysis). The result µ♯
∗
of our analysis (defined in Section 5.3.7) overapproxi-
mates the least fixed point of the concrete transformer
F♭(defined in Section 5.2.4).
That is, for every program point ℓ, we have:
lfp(F♭)[ℓ] ⊆Γ(µ♯
∗)[ℓ]

Proof. The complete proof is given in Appendix A.1.
It can be sketched as follows.
•
The functions α and γ form a Galois connection
between P(Σ♭) and P(Σ♯).
•
By pointwise extension, the functions A and Γ
form a Galois connection between M♭and M♯.
•
The abstract semantics of instructions (defined
in Section 5.3) soundly overapproximates their
concrete semantics (defined in Section 5.2).
•
The least fixed point of the concrete trans-
former is thus overapproximated by the least
fixed point of the abstract transformer (see
Propositions 24 and 25 of [36]).
•
The use of the widening operator in the com-
putation of µ♯
∗preserves the overapproximation
(see Proposition 31 of [36]).
Our analysis reports a CT violation whenever an
attacker-observable (address of a memory access, con-
dition of a branch instruction, or operand of a variable-
time instruction) depends on red-tainted or orange-
tainted data. The next result ensures that all CT
violations present in the tested program are reported
by our analysis.
Corollary 2. For every program point ℓ, if there
exists a concrete state σ♭∈lfp(F♭)[ℓ] and an archi-
tectural byte b ∈B such that σ♭[b].taint = Sec, then
there exists an abstract state σ♯∈µ♯
∗[ℓ] such that
σ♯[b] ∈{red, orange}.
The proof is given in Appendix A.2. It follows
directly from Theorem 1 and the definition of the
concretization function.
Our analysis reports a confirmed CT violation
when an attacker-observable depends on red-tainted
data in all abstract states at the corresponding pro-
gram point. The next result ensures that all confirmed
CT violations reported by our analysis correspond to
actual CT violations, assuming that there exists at
least one concrete execution reaching the correspond-
ing program point.
Corollary 3. Consider an arbitrary program point ℓ.
If there exists an architectural byte b ∈B such that for
every abstract state σ♯∈µ♯
∗[ℓ] we have σ♯[b] = red,
then for every concrete state σ♭∈lfp(F♭)[ℓ] we have
σ♭[b].taint = Sec.
The proof is given in Appendix A.2. It follows
directly from Theorem 1 and the definition of the
concretization function.
7. Implementation
We implement our analysis in a prototype tool
named SCOUT-CT and make it publicly available at
https://github.com/SCOUT-CT.
SCOUT-CT is implemented on top of the angr [55]
binary analysis framework. Although angr is primarily
designed for symbolic execution, we repurpose it to
implement our lightweight multi-taint analysis.
7.1. Program states in angr
In angr, a program state is represented as a map-
ping from each memory and register byte to either a
concrete value or a symbolic expression. A symbolic
expression is associated with a set of symbols.
From such a program state, angr can simulate the
execution of a program instruction to produce a new
state. If all inputs of the instruction are concrete val-
ues, angr simulates the operation as in a real execution
and produces a concrete output. If some inputs of the
instruction are symbolic expressions, the output is a
new symbolic expression whose associated symbols are
those of the input symbolic expressions.
7.2. Abstract states
As defined in Section 5.3.3, our analysis operates
on abstract states that map memory bytes to either a
concrete value or one of three taints (red, orange, or
green).
In SCOUT-CT, an abstract state is implemented
as an angr program state, where untainted data is
represented as concrete values and tainted data is
represented as symbolic expressions.
We use three distinct symbols to represent the
three taints.
A symbolic expression may be associated with mul-
tiple symbols. We define the taint represented by a
symbolic expression as red if at least one of its symbols
is the red symbol; otherwise, it is orange if at least
one of its symbols is the orange symbol; otherwise, it
is green. This follows the abstract semantics defined
in Section 5.3.3.
7.3. Basic block instructions semantics
The abstract semantics of non-branching instruc-
tions propagates taints from the input operands to the
output operands, or produces a concrete value if all
inputs are untainted.
We implement this by letting angr execute the
instructions of a basic block on the corresponding
program state. This makes angr generate symbolic out-
puts for instructions that operate on symbolic inputs,
effectively propagating the taints.
7.4. Control flow graph traversal
SCOUT-CT associates the entry and exit of each
basic block with a set of program states. It uses Kil-
dall’s algorithm to propagate program states across
the control flow graph of the program until a fixed
point is reached.
The exit states of a basic block are computed from
its entry states as defined in Section 7.3.
When a basic block ends with a conditional branch,
the guard of the branch is evaluated on each exit
state of the basic block. If the guard has a concrete
value, the state is only propagated to the appropriate
successor. If the guard is symbolic (i.e., tainted), the
state is propagated to both successors. This follows the

abstract semantics of conditional branching defined in
Section 5.3.4.
Note that, unlike in symbolic execution, our anal-
ysis does not make any call to an SMT solver.
8. Evaluation
The main contribution of our tool is its ability to
soundly scale to real-world implementations while au-
tomatically identifying a subset of confirmed violations
that require little manual verification.
We aim to experimentally evaluate the perfor-
mance of SCOUT-CT on realistic programs with re-
spect to
•
the proportion of confirmed violations among
all reported violations, and
•
its scalability compared to existing state-of-
the-art solutions.
To this end, we create a benchmark of crypto-
graphic software and run both SCOUT-CT and two
existing CT analysis tools on it.
Our benchmark is made publicly available at https:
//github.com/SCOUT-CT.
8.1. Consolidation threshold
Our analysis is parametrized by a consolidation
threshold τ (introduced in Section 4.2 and formally
defined in Section 5.3.7) that controls the trade-off
between precision and performance.
For the evaluation, the value of τ is selected dy-
namically. The analysis is first performed with τ = 8
and, if an unconfirmed CT violation is reported, the
value of τ is doubled and the analysis is re-executed,
until either no unconfirmed CT violation is reported
or τ reaches the value 16384.
8.2. Compared tools
We compare SCOUT-CT against Microwalk [16] and
Binsec/Rel [10], [34].
Microwalk is a dynamic analysis tool that performs
multiple executions of the tested program with dif-
ferent inputs, each time recording a trace of memory
accesses and branches, and compares those traces to
identify CT violations. Microwalk is not sound — it can
miss leaks — but all reported leaks are guaranteed to
be true positives.
As Microwalk cannot prove the absence of leaks, we
only evaluate it on non-CT programs of our bench-
mark.
Binsec/Rel is an analysis tool based on symbolic
execution. It executes the program on symbolic inputs,
systematically explores execution paths, and solves
SMT formulas to check if memory accesses or branches
depend on secret data. Binsec/Rel performs bounded
verification: the execution paths are explored up to
a certain depth. All reported leaks are guaranteed
to be true positives. Moreover, when the analysis is
exhaustive, all leaks are reported.
Microwalk and Binsec/Rel test programs provided
as compiled binaries. Both are recognized as effective
tools for testing real-world software [38], [39].
8.3. Benchmark
Our benchmark is composed of:
•
a non-CT AES implementation (tiny AES1),
•
various CT and non-CT symmetric crypto-
graphic primitives from BearSSL2,
•
a CT implementation of an elliptic-curve-based
digital signature from libhydrogen3,
•
the
reference
implementation4
of
the
K-
PKE.Decrypt function of the post-quantum
key encapsulation mechanism ML-KEM [56],
•
a collection of CT and non-CT utility functions
commonly found in cryptographic code,
•
a program (named “overapproximation” in the
results) similar to Listing 5 presented in Sec-
tion 4.1, that is specifically crafted to make
SCOUT-CT report a potential (unconfirmed)
CT violation.
The cryptographic libraries are compiled without
source code modification, and are used through their
public API only. All programs are compiled with de-
bug information (to enable locating the reported leaks
in the source code) and without compiler optimiza-
tions.
Manual inspection of the source code was per-
formed to identify lines that cause CT violations.
8.4. Metrics
For each program analysis we report:
•
The analysis duration. For SCOUT-CT, this in-
cludes the time taken by all analysis iterations
with increasing value of τ (see Section 8.1).
•
Whether an exhaustive analysis was completed,
that is, the analysis did not time out and (in
the case of Binsec/Rel) did not reach the explo-
ration depth limit. This metric is not applicable
to Microwalk, as, by design, it only analyzes a
subset of execution paths.
•
The proportion of CT violations detected. For
SCOUT-CT, the subset of confirmed violations
is reported separately.
We set a timeout of 1 hour for each analysis. The
evaluation was performed on a machine with an Intel
Xeon Silver 4216 @ 2.10 GHz CPU and 64 GiB of
memory.
8.5. Results
The evaluation results on non-CT programs are
presented in Table 2, and those on CT programs are
presented in Table 3. On CT programs, an exhaustive
analysis (E) indicates that the program was proven
constant-time.
Microwalk finds almost all timing leaks and com-
pletes all analyses in at most 20 seconds. By design,
it cannot prove the security of CT programs.
1. github.com/kokke/tiny-AES-c
2. bearssl.org
3. github.com/jedisct1/libhydrogen
4. https://github.com/pq-crystals/kyber

TABLE 2. Benchmark results for non-CT programs.
Microwalk
Binsec/Rel
SCOUT-CT
Benchmark
T
#V
T
E
#V
T
E
#V
#CV
util-mult-nonct1
4
2 / 2
ȯ

1 / 2
11

2 / 2
2
util-mult-nonct2
4
1 / 1
ȯ

1 / 1
9

1 / 1
1
util-mult-nonct3
4
1 / 1
ȯ

1 / 1
5

1 / 1
1
util-sqm-nonct
4
2 / 2
ȯ

1 / 2
13

2 / 2
2
util-password-nonct
3
1 / 1
1

1 / 1
5

1 / 1
1
util-sbox
3
1 / 1
1

1 / 1
3

1 / 1
1
overapproximation
3
1 / 3
57

3 / 3
3

3 / 3
2
bearssl-aes-big-cbcdec
35
36 / 36
1

4 / 36
89

36 / 36
36
bearssl-aes-big-cbcenc
10
36 / 36
114

36 / 36
19

36 / 36
36
bearssl-aes-small-cbcdec
29
5 / 5
73

5 / 5
50

5 / 5
5
bearssl-aes-small-cbcenc
24
5 / 5
173

5 / 5
35

5 / 5
5
tinyaes-enc
20
5 / 5
8

5 / 5
76

5 / 5
5
Total
–
96 / 98
–
–
64 / 98
–
–
98 / 98
97
T: analysis time in seconds (ȯ : timeout after 1 hour). E: whether an exhaustive analysis was performed. #V: number of violations
reported. #CV: number of confirmed violations reported.
TABLE 3. Benchmark results for CT programs.
Binsec/Rel
SCOUT-CT
Benchmark
T
E
T
E
util-mult-ct
1

2

util-sqm-ct
1

3

util-password-ct
1

3

bearssl-aes-ct-cbcdec
1547

49

bearssl-aes-ct-cbcenc
928

59

hydrogen-sign
3230

2827

ml-kem-indcpa-dec
92

666

T: analysis time in seconds. E: whether an exhaustive anal-
ysis was performed.
Binsec/Rel times out or reaches exploration depth
limits on most programs. It finds around two-thirds of
the leaks in non-CT programs, and is able to prove
the security of half of the CT programs.
SCOUT-CT completes exhaustive analyses on all
programs. Except for the digital signature and post-
quantum KEM programs, whose analyses take around
45 minutes and 10 minutes respectively, all analyses
complete in less than 2 minutes. SCOUT-CT success-
fully proves the security of all CT programs, and
reports all leaks in non-CT programs. Remarkably, all
leaks are reported as confirmed, except for the overap-
proximation program, which was specifically designed
to trigger such behavior.
8.6. Discussion
Our evaluation confirms the effectiveness of the
overapproximation tracking technique we propose. It
demonstrates the ability of our tool to automatically
classify most reported leaks as confirmed CT viola-
tions that require little manual verification.
The results also show that our approach, despite
relying on overapproximation, produces few (in this
benchmark, none) false positives.
The
experiments
demonstrate
the
ability
of
SCOUT-CT to scale to real-world cryptographic soft-
ware, producing exhaustive analyses in reasonable
time, and thus confirming its practical usefulness. The
execution time of SCOUT-CT is comparable to Mi-
crowalk while, unlike Microwalk, our tool performs a
sound analysis.
Binsec/Rel is sound and can theoretically find all
violations, but, due to bounded analysis, struggles
in practice to scale to larger programs that our tool
successfully analyses.
Overall, the results support the usefulness of the
new trade-off we propose for automatic program anal-
ysis in the constant-time threat model: while our tool
offers weaker guarantees regarding false positives than
complete tools such as Binsec/Rel and Microwalk, it
offers a sound analysis with good scalability.
9. Conclusion
We presented SCOUT-CT, a sound, path-sensitive,
binary-level analysis for verifying programs under the
constant-time threat model. Our approach uses over-
approximation to scale to real-world software, while
systematically tracking precision loss to automatically
identify a subset of reported violations as confirmed.
We formalized the analysis in the abstract inter-
pretation framework and proved its correctness.
Our prototype implementation successfully ana-
lyzes a set of real-world cryptographic implementa-
tions in reasonable time and classifies almost all re-
ported violations as confirmed. In our comparative
evaluation against state-of-the-art tools, SCOUT-CT
was the only approach that completed an exhaustive
analysis of all programs and proved the security of all
constant-time implementations.