Decomposing Multiplication: A Vertical Packing
Approach for Faster TFHE
Rostin Shokri and Nektarios Georgios Tsoutsos
University of Delaware
{rostinsh, tsoutsos}@udel.edu
Abstract. Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) enables private data
processing on untrusted servers. However, FHE performance remains a
critical bottleneck for applications like machine learning, which heav-
ily rely on both non-linear operations (e.g., comparisons) and numerous
ciphertext-ciphertext (CxC) and ciphertext-plaintext (CxP) multiplica-
tions. While modern FHE schemes like TFHE efficiently handle non-
linear operations, their multiplication time complexity remains a sig-
nificant performance limitation. This paper introduces novel algorithms
for CxC and CxP multiplication, as well as the dot-product, a criti-
cal kernel in machine learning inference (e.g., convolution). Our method
leverages Vertical Packing, decomposing multiplication into a series of
efficient, precision-dependent lookup table operations. We evaluate our
algorithms and their parallelized variants against the default implemen-
tation in TFHE-rs and a recent state-of-the-art work. Our results demon-
strate several times faster execution time, significantly accelerating FHE
for practical applications.
Keywords: Circuit Bootstrapping · Vertical Packing · Fully Homomor-
phic Multiplication · TFHE.
1
Introduction
Data-intensive applications, from large-scale genomic processing [5, 18, 19] to
advanced machine learning workloads [15, 17, 24], are increasingly migrated to
the cloud. This shift to remote data processing creates a paramount concern
for data confidentiality [29], as it exposes sensitive information to new risks,
such as untrusted servers reading and misusing personal data, as well as side-
channel attacks that can extract private data from co-located tenants [31, 32].
While standard encryption like AES [11] protects data at rest and in transit,
it is insufficient for end-to-end private computation, as data must be decrypted
server-side before it can be processed, creating a window of vulnerability.
An effective solution is Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) [16], which en-
ables direct computation on encrypted data, ensuring that secret keys are never
exposed, and no information can be gathered about the underlying plaintext.
There are several FHE schemes [3,7,14] to choose from that come with different
features and benefits. The TFHE (CGGI) scheme [9] in particular is effective for

handling non-linear operations, which are critical for applications like machine
learning [21,25]. This capability is powered by its programmable bootstrapping
(PBS) primitive, which can evaluate arbitrary univariate functions on small,
encrypted integers.
Beyond academic motivation, TFHE is already being exposed to application
developers through Zama’s software stack, tfhe-rs, which is a pure Rust imple-
mentation of TFHE for Boolean and integer arithmetic over encrypted data. It
has Rust, C, and WASM APIs as well as hardware-accelerated backends, and its
integer API specifically targets values smaller than 256 bits. Moreover, Zama’s
confidential smart-contract stack uses TFHE-rs.
A simple example is a confidential auction or token transfer. In a confiden-
tial auction, the contract must compare an encrypted bid against the encrypted
current maximum and conditionally update the winning state without revealing
which branch was taken. More generally, confidential smart contracts require
exact integer semantics. For instance, a confidential token transfer may need to
compute an exact fee, verify that a hidden balance is satisfied by a lower bound,
and then update encrypted balances accordingly. These patterns require en-
crypted multiplication, comparison, and conditional selection on exact integers,
which makes TFHE a perfect match. Consequently, improving the performance
of TFHE-native integer kernels such as multiplication is not only of theoreti-
cal interest, but also directly relevant to emerging applications that operate on
encrypted state and exact integer logic.
Despite TFHE’s strength in non-linear operations, its performance for arith-
metic operations, specifically ciphertext-ciphertext (CxC) as well as ciphertext-
plaintext (CxP) multiplication, remains a critical bottleneck. These operations
are the dominant cost in many privacy-preserving workloads, including the con-
volution and linear layers of neural networks. The original PBS paradigm, which
operates on small bit-widths, is inefficient for the large-bitwidth multiplications
(e.g., 16-bit or 32-bit) required by these workloads.
Recent refinements to the TFHE scheme [26,28] have introduced a practical
and efficient circuit bootstrapping (CBS) operation, which enables the compu-
tation of larger bit-width lookup tables (LUT) via the vertical packing (VP)
operation. The flexibility of the VP operation and the efficiency of the new CBS
bootstrapping make it possible to redesign core algorithms such as AES Tran-
sciphering [27]. The primary bottleneck for this approach, the CBS operation,
was historically too slow for practical use, having up to 10× overhead compared
to a regular PBS [8]. However, recent optimizations have reduced its cost to be
competitive with a standard PBS, making this computational model viable.
Although hybrid FHE pipelines that use CKKS for SIMD-efficient linear lay-
ers and TFHE for non-linear operations are an important direction, our focus
here is on a different setting. Hybrid designs optimize throughput for large packed
workloads, but they also depend on approximate arithmetic, scheme switch-
ing, and heterogeneous ciphertext representations. In contrast, this work targets
pure-TFHE exact integer arithmetic, where staying entirely within TFHE is
2

desirable for exact 16-bit/32-bit computation, comparison-heavy control flow,
which avoids costly scheme-switching overheads.
To date, these new primitives have not been leveraged to create optimized,
high-performance arithmetic algorithms. The default multiplication methods in
FHE libraries, such as tfhe-rs, still rely on an older, PBS-only computation
mode, which requires many PBS operations to enable computation on wider bit
sizes. For the first time, our work demonstrates a practical performance shift:
arithmetic algorithms utilizing modern CBS and Vertical Packing are now faster
than traditional PBS-only approaches. By leveraging the highly optimized CBS
algorithm introduced in [26], we show that the historical assumption that CBS
is “too slow” for arithmetic is no longer valid.
In this work, we propose a new set of multiplication algorithms that leverage
the VP paradigm to decompose multiplication into a series of efficient, precision-
dependent β-bit lookup table operations. Our novel methodology utilizes CBS
to refresh ciphertexts, ensuring the composability of our new operations. Com-
pared to recent approaches such as [22], which only support ciphertext-plaintext
multiplication, our solution and algorithms provide efficient solutions to both
ciphertext-plaintext and ciphertext-ciphertext multiplication. Our primary con-
tributions are as follows:
– We introduce novel algorithms for ciphertext-plaintext (CxP) and ciphertext-
ciphertext (CxC) multiplication, which are decomposed into β-bit LUTs and
evaluated using vertical packing.
– We propose an efficient ciphertext-plaintext dot-product algorithm, a critical
kernel in machine learning applications.
– We optimize the efficiency of our algorithms by utilizing a batched CBS
operation, significantly reducing the number of costly PBS operations.
– We analyze new parallelization strategies for these algorithms to maximize
throughput on multi-core architectures.
Roadmap: The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we present
essential background information on FHE and the TFHE primitives. Section 3
introduces our novel multiplication algorithms, along with parallelization and
optimization strategies. In Section 4, we present our experimental evaluation, re-
porting significant speedups against baseline and state-of-the-art works. Finally,
Section 5 discusses notable prior works, and Section 6 presents our concluding
remarks.
2
Background
2.1
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE)
Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) provides the capability to perform arbi-
trary computations directly on encrypted data, thus avoiding the need to decrypt
sensitive data during processing. Modern FHE schemes inject noise into cipher-
texts, which accumulates with each homomorphic operation. If this noise exceeds
3

a certain threshold, decryption will fail. To manage this, schemes utilize boot-
strapping, a process that homomorphically evaluates the decryption function to
reset the noise and permit further computation. The security of most contempo-
rary designs is based on problems like Learning with Errors (LWE) [23] and its
ring variant (RLWE) [20], which are believed to be post-quantum secure. These
schemes fundamentally support homomorphic addition and multiplication, which
are sufficient to express any arbitrary computation.
A major category of FHE schemes is designed for integer (or word-wise)
arithmetic. Schemes such as BFV [14] and BGV [3] can “batch” multiple integers
into a single RLWE ciphertext, supporting both addition and multiplication on
the packed data. The CKKS scheme [7] provides analogous batching capabilities
but is optimized for approximate real-number arithmetic. In contrast, bit-wise
schemes like FHEW [13] operate at the level of individual bits; FHEW encrypts
each bit into a separate LWE ciphertext, facilitating low-latency evaluation of
logic gates. It employs gate bootstrapping, a technique that performs a Boolean
operation (e.g., XOR, AND) and resets the ciphertext noise simultaneously.
TFHE [9] extends this bit-wise approach by introducing programmable boot-
strapping (PBS). At the core of PBS is a fast blind rotation primitive, which,
combined with binary secret keys, allows TFHE to evaluate any arbitrary uni-
variate function as part of the noise-refreshing step. A single PBS operation
typically completes in tens of milliseconds on a CPU. This mechanism also al-
lows TFHE to efficiently handle small integers (e.g., 1 to 4 bits) using much
smaller lattice parameters than those required by word-wise schemes.
2.2
TFHE Primitives
The TFHE scheme’s original computing paradigm [9] uses three fundamental
operations: PBS, key switching, and modulus switching. Subsequent research [2]
introduced a new computing paradigm, by also utilizing circuit bootstrapping
and vertical packing, which have enhanced the scheme’s performance and ex-
panded its versatility for a wider range of applications. These core operations
are described next.
Programmable Bootstrapping (PBS) The PBS operation in TFHE is a
key procedure that simultaneously refreshes a noisy LWE ciphertext and com-
putes a user-defined function f over its encrypted message µin. The high-level
process, detailed in [9, Alg 9], consists of three stages. First, ModSwitch is ap-
plied to the input LWE ciphertext, mapping its modulus down from q to 2N,
where N is the GLWE ring dimension. Next, BlindRotate is performed on the
modulus-switched ciphertext; this step uses a GLWE accumulator that encodes
the lookup table for the function f. Finally, SampleExtract retrieves the first
polynomial coefficient of the rotated GLWE, resulting in a new LWE ciphertext
(under the GLWE secret key S) that encrypts the function’s output, f(µin).
The BlindRotate step itself is implemented using the homomorphic multiplexer
4

(CMUX) primitive that relies on the external product, which was introduced
in [9].
Circuit Bootstrapping (CBS) In the CBS paradigm, input LWE ciphertexts
are lifted into the GGSW format, holding a single bit of message. A GGSW
ciphertext is defined by a decomposition depth ℓand base β, comprising (k +1)ℓ
GLWE ciphertexts under the secret key S = (S0, . . . , Sk). Assuming a single mes-
sage bit m, these components take the form GLWES(m · Si ·
q
β j ) for 1 ≤j ≤ℓand
0 ≤i ≤k. Recent works [26, 28] have introduced new pipelines to significantly
reduce CBS latency by splitting the process into two phases: refresh and con-
version. First, the PBSmanyLUT refresh stage uses a single blind rotation, by
omitting sample extraction to generate multiple scaled LWE encryptions of the
same bit. Second, a conversion stage assembles these LWE ciphertexts into the
final GGSW. Their conversion stage improves upon previous work and involves
a Homomorphic Trace (HomTrace), which applies GLWE key switching
to isolate the message in monomial terms while zeroing out others, followed by
Scheme Switching (SS), which uses an external product to combine the ci-
phertexts and secret key into a valid GGSW. For a detailed algorithmic overview,
we refer the reader to [26,28].
2.3
Vertical Packing (VP)
In intuitive terms, Vertical Packing (VP) can be viewed as a way to evaluate
a wider look-up table by using several encrypted bits together as the table in-
dex. Rather than bootstrapping each small operation separately, VP packs the
selection logic into one procedure that outputs the LUT value corresponding to
the encrypted input. In this sense, VP acts like a homomorphic table lookup for
larger integers: the encrypted input chooses a row of the table, and the server
cannot infer which row was selected. Evaluating a Look-Up Table (LUT) for
m GGSW-encrypted input bits via VP incurs a cost that directly depends on
the number of inputs m relative to the GLWE ring dimension N. The process is
highly efficient when the input size is small (m ≤log2 N). In this case, the evalu-
ation only requires a single blind rotation (BR), which costs just log2 N CMUX
operations. This is a major advantage over a standard PBS, which would re-
quire n CMUX operations for its BR (where n ≫log2 N in typical parameters).
However, if the number of inputs is large (m > log2 N), the cost increases sig-
nificantly. An initial CMUX tree is required to reduce the inputs before the BR.
This tree adds a cost of 2 m−log2 N −1 CMUX operations, which is exponential in
the number of “excess” inputs. On the output side, a single VP evaluation pro-
duces an LWE ciphertext capable of encoding log2 p bits, where p is the message
modulus. This capacity limit means a full m-to-m bit LUT must be partitioned
into
m
log2 p separate VP evaluations. For example, an 8-to-8 bit LUT using a
modulus of p = 2 (where log2 2 = 1 bit) would require 8 distinct VP runs to
compute the full 8-bit output.
5

2.4
Threat Model
We consider the standard outsourced-computation setting for FHE: a client en-
crypts inputs under their secret key and sends the encrypted ciphertexts and
public evaluation keys to an untrusted server for homomorphic evaluation. The
adversary is honest-but-curious and may observe all ciphertexts, public keys, and
intermediate encrypted states, but does not know the secret key. While standard
TFHE provides IND-CPA security, our goal is targeting a stronger threat model,
IND-CPAD. This threat model was proposed to defend against key recovery at-
tacks proposed in [6], which uses a decryption oracle to attack the approximate
nature of decryption. While the main operation of TFHE, the programmable
bootstrap (PBS), produces exact results, it introduces a small failure probabil-
ity, Pfail, due to the high noise growth during modulus switching. Therefore, we
target a correctness failure probability of Pfail = 2−128, to ensure security against
the attack, since the Pfail becomes a security parameter in this threat model. We
generate and use parameters that achieve this probability of failure for both our
work and related works. We do not address malicious-server verifiability, access-
pattern leakage, or implementation-level side channels such as timing, cache, or
cross-tenant attacks.
3
Our Proposed Approach
In this section, we formalize the framework underlying our vertical packing–based
multiplication algorithms in TFHE. We first present ciphertext–plaintext (CxP)
multiplication, where an n-bit input is decomposed into β-bit limbs, lifted from
LWE to GGSW via circuit bootstrapping, and processed through vertical pack-
ing LUTs to produce base 2β partial products. We then reuse the same techniques
to construct ciphertext–ciphertext (CxC) multiplication and derive ciphertext-
plaintext dot product (CxP-DP). We enhance performance by using batched
CBS, reducing CBS and VP computations, and describe a parallelization strat-
egy that exploits the independence of CBS and VP calls to obtain scalable per-
formance on multi-core CPUs.
3.1
Ciphertext-Plaintext Multiplication
To explain the methodology of our multiplication algorithms, we first show how
we decompose an n-bit multiplication into a sequence of base-2β limb products
and carry-propagation steps that can be realized using CBS, VP, and β-bit
ciphertext-ciphertext addition subroutine.
Choosing optimal β For all our algorithms, we choose β = 16, since this is the
optimal number for which a 16-bit VP LUT remains efficient, and reduces the
number of intermediate CBS operations. In particular, the ring dimension N we
choose for our TFHE parameters is either N = 1024 or N = 2048. Therefore, the
VP operation consists of log2(N) + 2(16−log2(N)) −1 CMUX operations (which
6

equals to either 73 or 42 CMUX operations respectively). A PBS requires around
an order of magnitude more CMUX operations, making it significantly more
expensive. Choosing β = 8 can effectively reduce the VP execution time (to
just 8 CMUX operations), but this saving is negated by the increased number
of intermediate CBS operations required due to the rise in limb products. Since
VP already has a much lower relative latency than PBS (a sub-procedure used
in CBS), the overall performance gain is minimal.
Our Methodology We assume n is a multiple of 16, the bit width of the LUT
we decompose to. The underlying LWE scheme has plaintext modulus p = 2κ,
so each LWE ciphertext encrypts a value in Zp (for κ = 1, this is a single bit).
We represent each message in Z2n as LWE ciphertexts encrypting chunks of
message in Z2κ, arranged into t blocks holding 16 bits of message, divided into
16
κ positions:
t := n
16,
Zi =
 EncLWE(zi,0), . . . , EncLWE(zi, 16
κ −1)

,
0 ≤i ≤t −1.
The first step is to apply CBS (or batched CBS if κ ≥2) to each LWE ciphertext.
In normal CBS, where κ = 1, it converts 16 LWE ciphertexts to 16 GGSW
ciphertexts. In the batched CBS case, assume we have κ = 2, then we have
8 LWE ciphertexts, each holding two bits; so, the batched CBS converts each
LWE holding two bits into two GGSW ciphertexts, each holding one of the bits.
Therefore we get:
Xi :=
 EncGGSW(zi,0), . . . , EncGGSW(zi,15)

for the GGSW-controlled inputs to vertical packing LUTs.
We view X as decomposed into t base-B limbs,
X =
t−1
X
i=0
XiBi,
Xi ∈{0, . . . , B −1}.
(1)
Scalar decomposition. Let S ∈Z2n be the plaintext scalar. We also decompose
it into base B:
S =
t−1
X
j=0
SjBj,
Sj ∈{0, . . . , B −1}.
(2)
Product in base B = 216. Using (1) and (2), the product expands:
SX =


t−1
X
j=0
SjBj


 t−1
X
i=0
XiBi
!
=
t−1
X
i=0
t−1
X
j=0
Pi,jBi+j,
(3)
where Pi,j := SjXi are 32-bit partial products with 0 ≤Pi,j < B2 = 232. We
write each partial product as
Pi,j = P (0)
i,j + B P (1)
i,j ,
(4)
7

with low and high 16-bit parts P (0)
i,j := Pi,j mod B, P (1)
i,j :=
j
Pi,j
B
k
. Substitut-
ing (4) into (3) gives
SX =
X
i,j
 P (0)
i,j + BP (1)
i,j

Bi+j =
X
i,j
P (0)
i,j Bi+j +
X
i,j
P (1)
i,j Bi+j+1.
(5)
Modulo Bt = 2n, only exponents ≤t −1 remain. For each limb k = 0, . . . , t −1,
the (unnormalized) coefficient is
Zk :=
X
i+j=k
P (0)
i,j +
X
i+j+1=k
P (1)
i,j .
(6)
We therefore have
SX ≡
t−1
X
k=0
ZkBk
(mod Bt).
To obtain proper base-B limbs we normalize by adding the carries from
previous computations. Assume C0 = 0, we have:
Yk := (Zk + Ck) mod B,
0 ≤k ≤t −1,
(7)
Ck+1 :=
jZk + Ck
B
k
,
0 ≤k ≤t −1,
(8)
so that Yk ∈{0, . . . , B −1} and SX ≡Pt−1
k=0 YkBk (mod Bt).
Realization via VP and 16-bit CxC addition For each scalar limb Sj we
define two GLWE LUTs f (0)
j
(u) = (Sju) mod B, and f (1)
j
(u) = ⌊Sju
B ⌋, with u ∈
{0, . . . , B−1}. We apply two sets of 16-bit VP operations P(0)
i,j ←VP(p)
16
 Xi, f (0)
j

and P(1)
i,j ←VP(p)
16
 Xi, f (1)
j

to the GGSW vector Xi, outputting 16
κ LWE cipher-
texts over Zp.
Now, when adding the partial products for each limb index k, we maintain
an LWE state Yk ( 16
κ LWE ciphertexts) Whenever a new low part P (0)
i,j or high
part P (1)
i,j contributes to limb k, we update with (Yk, C) ←Add16CXC(p)(Yk, P),
where Add16CXC(p) is a 16-bit ciphertext-ciphertext addition subroutine over Zp
LWE ciphertexts, and C is a carry block to be propagated to Yk+1, consistent
with the recursion on Ck.
If at some later stage a Yk must be used as VP input, each LWE slot in
Yk is first circuit-bootstrapped back to GGSW, and the resulting GGSW vector
is fed into another VP. In this way we obtain all limbs Y0, . . . , Yt−1 as 16-slot
LWE blocks over Zp, realizing the exact product Y ≡SX (mod 2n) using only
CBS, VP, and 16-bit ciphertext–ciphertext additions. We present our algorithm
for CxP multiplication in Algorithm 1.
8

Algorithm 1 Homomorphic n-bit scalar–ciphertext multiplication via CBS, VP,
and 16-bit CxC addition
Input: n multiple of 16; B = 216; t ←n/16; Plaintext scalar S ∈{0, . . . , 2n −1}.
Input: Plaintext modulus p = 2κ (each LWE holds κ bits).
Input: LWE
encryptions
encoding
the
input
integer
X
as
Zi
=
(EncLWE(zi,0), . . . , EncLWE(zi, 16
κ −1)), for i = 0, . . . , t −1.
Output: For
each
k
=
0, . . . , t −1,
a
16-bit
output
block
Yk
=
(EncLWE(yk,0), . . . , EncLWE(yk, 16
κ −1)) over Zp, encoding the k-th limb of Y ≡SX
(mod 2n).
1: S = Pt−1
j=0 SjBj, with Sj ∈{0, . . . , B −1}.
2: for i = 0 to t −1 do
3:
for r = 0 to 16
κ −1 do
4:
(EncGGSW(zi,κr), . . . , EncGGSW(zi,κr+κ−1)) ←CBS(κ)(EncLWE(zi,r))
▷
regular CBS if κ = 1, batched CBS if κ > 1
5:
Xi ←(EncGGSW(zi,0), . . . , EncGGSW(zi,15))
6: for k = 0 to t −1 do
7:
Yk ←016/κ
▷all-zero 16-bit block over Zp
8:
View Yk = (Yk,lo, Yk,hi), where each half is an 8-bit block of size 8/κ
9: 0lo, 0hi ←encrypted 8-bit zero blocks
10: Czero ←EncLWE(0)
▷encrypted zero carry bit
11: for i = 0 to t −1 do
12:
for r = 0 to 16
κ −1 do
13:
(EncGGSW(zi,κr), . . . , EncGGSW(zi,κr+κ−1)) ←CBS(κ)(EncLWE(zi,r))
▷
regular CBS if κ = 1, batched CBS if κ > 1
14:
Xi ←(EncGGSW(zi,0), . . . , EncGGSW(zi,15))
15: for k = 0 to t −1 do
16:
Yk ←016/κ
▷all-zero 16-bit block over Zp
17:
View Yk = (Yk,lo, Yk,hi), where each half is an 8-bit block of size 8/κ
18: 0lo, 0hi ←encrypted 8-bit zero blocks
19: Czero ←EncLWE(0)
▷encrypted zero carry bit
20: for j = 0 to t −1 do
21:
Define GLWE LUTs
f (0)
j
(u) = (Sju) mod B,
f (1)
j
(u) =
jSju
B
k
,
where u ∈{0, . . . , B −1}.
22:
for i = 0 to t −1 do
23:
k ←i + j
24:
P(0)
i,j ←VP(p)
16
 Xi, f (0)
j

▷16/κ LWEs over Zp
25:
P(1)
i,j ←VP(p)
16
 Xi, f (1)
j

▷16/κ LWEs over Zp
26:
View P(0)
i,j = (P(0)
i,j,lo, P(0)
i,j,hi) and P(1)
i,j = (P(1)
i,j,lo, P(1)
i,j,hi), where each half is
an 8-bit block of size 8/κ.
27:
if k < t then
28:
 (Yk,lo, Yk,hi), C

←Add16CXC(p) Yk,lo, Yk,hi, P(0)
i,j,lo, P(0)
i,j,hi, Czero

29:
if k + 1 < t then
30:
 (Yk+1,lo, Yk+1,hi), C

←Add16CXC(p) Yk+1,lo, Yk+1,hi, P(1)
i,j,lo,
P(1)
i,j,hi, C

31:
for r = k + 2 to t −1 do
32:
 (Yr,lo, Yr,hi), C

←Add16CXC(p) Yr,lo, Yr,hi, 0lo, 0hi, C

33: return Y0, . . . , Yt−1
9

16-bit Ciphertext-Ciphertext Addition An n-bit ciphertext addition using
tfhe-rs is implemented by utilizing a carry space for each LWE ciphertext,
where intermediate additions are stored in the LWE ciphertexts, and is prop-
agated using a PBS. Since the carry space must be empty for subsequent op-
erations, another PBS is used to empty the carry space. In our algorithms, we
do not support any carry space; therefore, we must compute the additions with
the VP LUTs. One VP LUT is used to add the ciphertext bits, represented with
the function fsum, and we use another VP LUT to get the carry and propagate
to the next limb computation, with the function fcarry. The algorithm for 16-
bit ciphertext addition follows the blueprint of CxP given in Algorithm 2. The
algorithm inputs two LWE encrypted operands X and Y , and a carry bit Cin.
Algorithm 2 16-bit ciphertext–ciphertext addition Add16CXC(p)
Input: Xlo, Xhi, Ylo, Yhi (8-bit LWE blocks over Zp), Cin (1-bit LWE over Zp)
Output: Zlo, Zhi (8-bit LWE blocks over Zp), Cout (1-bit LWE over Zp)
1: (XG
lo, XG
hi, Y G
lo , Y G
hi , CG
in) ←CBS(Xlo, Xhi, Ylo, Yhi, Cin)
2: Zlo ←VP(p)
17
 XG
lo, Y G
lo , CG
in, fsum,0

3: C1 ←VP(p)
17
 XG
lo, Y G
lo , CG
in, fcarry,0

4: CG
1 ←CBS(C1)
5: Zhi ←VP(p)
17
 XG
hi, Y G
hi , CG
1 , fsum,1

6: Cout ←VP(p)
17
 XG
hi, Y G
hi , CG
1 , fcarry,1

7: return (Zlo, Zhi), Cout
Small running example. For intuition, consider a toy radix-B multiplication with
two limbs:
X = X0 + BX1,
S = S0 + BS1.
Then
SX = X0S0 + B(X0S1 + X1S0) + B2X1S1.
Modulo B2, the last term vanishes, so the output consists of a low limb from
X0S0 and a high limb obtained by accumulating the carry from X0S0 together
with the cross terms X0S1 and X1S0. Our homomorphic algorithm follows ex-
actly this structure: CBS lifts encrypted limb blocks to GGSW, VP computes
the low/high partial products, and Add16CXC merges them.
Batched CBS Optimization To improve the efficiency of our algorithm, we
optimize it by employing a batched CBS [26], which can compute the scaled
variants of multiple bits τ stored in a single LWE ciphertext with a single blind
rotation. It utilizes the PBSmanyLUT [10] and multi-value bootstrapping [4]. Doing
so requires larger cryptographic parameters, which we account for in our param-
eter sets. The higher the value τ is, the larger the noise growth. The output of
the PBSmanyLUT is the scaled LWE ciphertexts of the τ bits. For the conversion
10

step, however, the HomTrace operation and the scheme switching (SS) operation
are still done on each bit separately. Since the blind rotation in the PBSmanyLUT
is the most costly operation by far, this significantly increases the efficiency of
our algorithms. For example, in Algorithm 1, we set κ = τ, and a batched CBS
is computed instead of a regular CBS.
Note that the number of VP operations also decreases, as the output LWE
should also hold p = 2τ bits, to allow batched CBS for subsequent computations.
Design tradeoffs. The main computational tradeoff in our design is between
the cost of evaluating a wider VP LUT and the number of intermediate CBS
and addition stages induced by a smaller radix. Choosing β = 16 reduces the
number of limb products and intermediate refreshes, while keeping VP within the
efficient regime of our parameter set. Therefore, our method replaces many small
PBS-style digit operations with a smaller number of wider CBS+VP operations.
A second consideration is composability. We introduce CBS between arith-
metic stages not only to convert LWE ciphertexts into the GGSW form required
by VP, but also to refresh noise through its underlying PBS step, thereby en-
abling further multi-stage computation. This means that CBS is both a format-
conversion mechanism and a composability mechanism in our framework.
Finally, this design comes with an encoding-overhead tradeoff. Lifting com-
pact LWE limb blocks into GGSW increases the size of intermediate ciphertexts,
but it allows each refreshed block to drive wider LUT evaluations and reduces
the number of repeated small-digit PBS computations. Therefore, the proposed
method is best viewed as optimizing the latency/parallelism tradeoff of pure-
TFHE arithmetic, rather than minimizing intermediate ciphertext footprint.
3.2
Ciphertext-Plaintext Dot Product
Given a plaintext vector S = (S(0), . . . , S(m−1)) and an encrypted vector X =
(X(0), . . . , X(m−1)) of n-bit integers in Z2n, the ciphertext–plaintext dot product
is
D :=
m−1
X
ℓ=0
S(ℓ)X(ℓ) mod 2n.
We compute it by reusing our CxP multiplication as a black box: for each co-
ordinate ℓwe homomorphically evaluate the product S(ℓ)X(ℓ) via Algorithm 1,
and then sum all results limb-wise using the same 16-bit ciphertext–ciphertext
adder and carry propagation as in the CxP case.
3.3
Ciphertext-Ciphertext Multiplication
For ciphertext–ciphertext (CxC) multiplication, we follow the same long-multipli-
cation structure as in the CxP case: both encrypted inputs X, Y ∈Z2n are
decomposed into base-B limbs X = P
i XiBi, Y = P
j YjBj, we form par-
tial products Pi,j = XiYj, split each Pi,j into low/high 16-bit halves, and ac-
cumulate them with 16-bit CxC addition and carry propagation as in Equa-
tions (6)–(8). The key difference is how we obtain Pi,j homomorphically: since
11

Algorithm 3 Homomorphic CxP dot product via CxP multiplication and 16-bit
CxC addition
Input: Vector length m; bit width n multiple of 16; B = 216; t ←n/16.
Input: Plaintext scalars S(0), . . . , S(m−1) ∈{0, . . . , 2n −1}.
Input: For each λ, LWE encryptions of X(λ) ∈Z2n as blocks Z(λ)
0 , . . . , Z(λ)
t−1.
Output: LWE blocks D0, . . . , Dt−1 encoding D = Pm−1
λ=0 S(λ)X(λ) mod 2n.
1: for k = 0 to t −1 do
2:
Dk ←016/κ
▷all-zero 16-bit LWE block over Zp
3:
View Dk = (Dk,lo, Dk,hi), where each half is an 8-bit block of size 8/κ
4: for λ = 0 to m −1 do
5:
(Y(λ)
0
, . . . , Y(λ)
t−1) ←CxP_Mul
 S(λ), Z(λ)
0 , . . . , Z(λ)
t−1

▷Call Algorithm 1
6:
C0 ←EncLWE(0)
▷encrypted zero carry bit
7:
for k = 0 to t −1 do
8:
View Y(λ)
k
= (Y(λ)
k,lo, Y(λ)
k,hi), where each half is an 8-bit block of size 8/κ
9:
 (Dk,lo, Dk,hi), Ck+1

←Add16CXC(p) Dk,lo, Dk,hi, Y(λ)
k,lo, Y(λ)
k,hi, Ck

▷discard Ct since computation is modulo 2n
10: return D0, . . . , Dt−1
both operands are encrypted, we now apply CBS to both inputs and implement
the map (u, v) 7→u · v via 16-bit VP LUTs whose inputs are two encrypted
chunks of size 8 bits each. In other words, each logical base-B limb is internally
represented as two 8-bit chunks per operand so that any cross-multiplied pair
(u, v) fits into a 16-bit LUT; VP evaluates these cross-products, which are ho-
momorphically accumulated to form the full Pi,j. The resulting low and high
16-bit components are fed into the same accumulation and carry pipeline as in
CxP multiplication. Thus, CxC multiplication reuses the CxP framework ver-
batim, but with doubled CBS cost (both inputs are circuit-bootstrapped) and
8-bit chunks per encrypted limb to respect the 16-bit LUT constraint.
Ciphertext–ciphertext dot products can then be derived by combining this
CxC multiplication with the dot-product blueprint of Section 3.2, replacing each
CxP scalar multiplication by a CxC multiplication and summing the resulting
products with the same 16-bit CxC adder.
Implementation and Parallelization The parallelism in our framework follows
directly from the data-flow of our Algorithms. The expensive front-end opera-
tions CBS and VP, act on independent ciphertext blocks and partial products,
and therefore admit coarse-grained task parallelism. In CxP multiplication, each
input block can be circuit-bootstrapped independently, and each partial prod-
uct LUT evaluation can be scheduled independently. The same structure carries
over to CxC multiplication, with additional parallelism from circuit bootstrap-
ping both operands, and to CxP-DP, where the per-coordinate multiplications
are also independent.
12

Table 1. Our parameter set for our multiplication algorithms, optimized for τ = 2.
n
N
k ℓks Bks ℓpbs Bpbs ℓtr Btr ℓss Bss ℓggsw Bggsw
ϑ
τ
Pfail
768 1024 2 4
23
2
215
5
28
2 217
2
27
1
2
2−157.25
Table 2. Default parameter set from tfhe-rs.
n
N
k ℓpbs Bpbs ℓks Bks
Pfail
918 2048 1
1
223
4
24 2−129.581
4
Experimental Evaluation
We implement our proposed algorithms in tfhe-rs [30], a state-of-the-art TFHE
library written in Rust. We adopt the refined CBS algorithm from [26], and
modify it to be compatible with the latest version of tfhe-rs, and use the new
Centered Mean Noise Reduction from [12] to reduce modulus switching errors,
which allows us to generate more efficient parameters for the same Pfail.
We compare the efficiency and performance of our algorithms against the de-
fault operations provided by tfhe-rs, and the current state-of-the-art work [22]
that proposes efficient Plaintext Ciphertext multiplication and Plaintext Cipher-
text dot-product. We also compare the parallelized versions of our algorithms
with tfhe-rs and [22]. We target a failure probability of Pfail = 2−128 for all
of our experiments. All experiments were conducted on an Ubuntu workstation
equipped with an AMD 7970X CPU and 160 GB of RAM. We remark that
all parameter sets are configured to provide 128 bits of cryptographic security,
based on the lattice estimator [1], which is standard in the literature.
4.1
Our Cryptographic Parameters
In terms of performance, the PBS and HomTrace operations are the most expen-
sive. For memory, the primary overhead comes from GGSW ciphertexts, making
it crucial to minimize the ℓggsw parameter. Our judiciously optimized parame-
ters are presented in Table 1. We set ℓggsw to the minimum possible value, as a
value of 1 would lead to uncontrollable noise growth. We employ batched CBS
with τ = 2, which achieves a failure probability of Pfail ≈2−128.
For both tfhe-rs and [22] experiments, we use the default parameter set
that is used in the high level API of the tfhe-rs library, and show it in Table 2.
This parameter set also uses the Centered Mean Noise Reduction technique to
optimize the parameters and noise, and targets the same probability of failure.
4.2
Evaluation Key Size Comparison
Table 3 compares the evaluation-key footprint of the default PBS-only tfhe-rs
context against our custom CBS+VP context. The default context contains the
standard Fourier PBS key and an LWE key switching key, while our CBS+VP
13

Table 3. Evaluation-key size comparison (MB).
Evaluation key component
PBS
CBS+VP
Fourier PBS bootstrapping key
60.162
113.246
LWE key switching key
60.228
–
Pre-PBS GLWE key switching key
–
0.459
Automorphism keys (total)
–
2.458
Scheme switching key
–
0.295
Total
120.390
116.457
context uses a larger Fourier PBS key together with additional key material for
pre-PBS GLWE key switching, automorphisms, and scheme switching.
An important point is that the pre-PBS GLWE key switching key is much
smaller than the standard LWE key switching key. This is because its size scales
with the GLWE secret dimension k, which is a small constant, whereas the
LWE key switching key scales with the LWE secret dimension n, which is much
larger. Although a GLWE ciphertext is itself larger than an LWE ciphertext,
the number of switched secret components is dramatically smaller. This is why,
despite supporting the richer CBS+VP functionality, the total evaluation-key
material of our custom context is slightly smaller than the default tfhe-rs
setting: 116.46 MB versus 120.39 MB.
4.3
CxP and CxC Multiplication Results
We evaluate our ciphertext-plaintext (CxP) and ciphertext-ciphertext (CxC)
multiplication algorithms against the baseline implementations in tfhe-rs [30]
and the work from Pottier et al. [22]. Notably, for CxC, we only compare against
tfhe-rs [30], as the work from [22] does not support this operation type, since
they rely on the redundancy in the LUTs, induced by a plaintext operand that
reduces the PBS count. We highlight that our algorithms work effectively re-
gardless of whether there is a plaintext operand or not, which makes our CxC
methodology uniquely valuable. For both CxP and CxC, we experiment for var-
ious bit sizes and use the parameter set from Table 1 for our scheme and the
parameter set from Table 2 for the related works. We also exploit thread-level
parallelism and report latencies for 1, and 8 CPU threads. The resulting execu-
tion times and speedups are summarized in Tables 4 and 5.
4.4
CxP-DP Operation Results
We evaluate our ciphertext–plaintext dot product (CxP-DP) algorithm against
tfhe-rs [30] and [22]. We consider vector lengths m ∈{2, 4, 8, 16} of 16-bit en-
tries, using the same parameter sets from Tables 1 and 2. Our scheme reuses
the CxP multiplication as a building block and exploits thread-level parallelism
across CBS and VP operations. We report latencies for 1, 8, and 16 CPU threads.
14

Table 4. Execution time (s) of ciphertext-plaintext (CxP) multiplication for different
bit-widths and thread counts. All executions target Pfail=2−128. We also report the
approximate lifted input GGSW overhead under the parameters of Table 1.
Type Overhead (MB) Threads [30] (s) [22] (s) Ours (s) Speedup (×)
8-bit
1.180
1
0.14
0.11
0.08
(1.75, 1.37)
8
0.05
0.05
0.04
(1.2, 1.2)
16-bit
2.359
1
0.52
0.50
0.15
(3.46, 3.33)
8
0.09
0.08
0.06
(1.5, 1.33)
32-bit
4.719
1
1.06
1.02
0.55
(1.92, 1.85)
8
0.22
0.21
0.17
(1.29, 1.23)
Table 5. Execution time (s) of ciphertext-ciphertext (CxC) multiplication for different
bit-widths and thread counts. All executions target Pfail=2−128. We also report the
approximate lifted input GGSW overhead under the parameters of Table 1.
Type Overhead (MB) Threads TFHE-rs [30] (s) Ours (s) Speedup (×)
8-bit
2.359
1
0.42
0.14
3.00
8
0.09
0.04
2.25
16-bit
4.719
1
1.69
0.59
2.86
8
0.25
0.11
2.27
32-bit
9.437
1
6.59
2.80
2.35
8
0.90
0.52
1.73
The resulting execution times and speedups for CxP-DP are summarized in Ta-
ble 6. As the vector size m grows, the number of additions and carry propagation
increases due to the lack of carry space, which raises the latency overhead.
5
Related Works
There has been substantial work focusing on accelerating TFHE-based integer
arithmetic at the library level, most prominently in tfhe-rs [30]. The high-level
integer API represents an n-bit encrypted integer as a radix decomposition with
the default parameter set, where each digit stores 2 message bits and 2 carry bits
and 1 padding bit, and an n-bit value is encoded as k = ⌈ℓ/2⌉LWE ciphertexts
in base B = 22. Integer multiplication is then implemented by a digit-wise
procedure that follows a schoolbook long multiplication on these radix digits: all
small-digit products and carry updates are realized by evaluating lookup tables
via programmable bootstrapping (PBS) on LWE ciphertexts, using the generic
bi-variate trick, to homomorphically compute the digit product and carry bits.
In contrast, our work changes the multiplication algorithmic structure: by lifting
blocks to GGSW and using CBS and VP, we reduce the number of bootstraps
and LUT evaluations required per n-bit product, so any future low-level PBS
optimizations in TFHE libraries translate into further gains for our algorithms.
15

Table 6. Execution time (s) of ciphertext–plaintext dot product (CxP-DP) for dif-
ferent vector sizes m and thread counts. The input bit size is 16 bits. All executions
target Pfail=2−128. Running [22] with no bucket doubling and window size 1 for fair
comparison.
Size m
Threads
[22] (s)
Ours (s)
Speedup (×)
2
1
1.43
0.64
2.23
8
0.23
0.18
1.27
4
1
2.53
1.51
1.67
8
0.38
0.32
1.18
8
1
4.58
3.26
1.40
8
0.70
0.61
1.14
16
1
8.66
7.21
1.20
8
1.21
1.10
1.10
As discussed, the current state-of-the-art for TFHE integer scalar multiplica-
tion is SMOOTHIE [22] by Pottier et al., which proposes new ciphertext-scalar
multiplication and ciphertext-scalar dot-product algorithms directly on top of
tfhe-rs. They adopt the bucket method known from elliptic-curve multi-scalar
multiplication, and adapt it to TFHE and introduce TFHE-specific tricks, such
as a negation-with-offset strategy that avoids expensive carry propagation after
negation, power-shift aggregation, and bucket-merging techniques that aggres-
sively cut the number of bootstraps, as well as a bucket-doubling scheme that
removes per-input precomputation in the multi-scalar case. Our work, however,
utilizes a different paradigm, adopting Vertical Packing as our main operation
to compute multiplication, by decomposing it to LUTs of a large size B = 16
that we found to be optimal. This approach yields measured speedups ranging
from 1.10× to 3.46× across different benchmarks, due to our VP paradigm that
handles both CxP and CxC effectively.
6
Concluding Remarks
In this work, we propose a novel multiplication algorithm that decomposes the
operation into 16-bit Look-Up Tables (LUTs), which are then efficiently com-
puted using Vertical Packing (VP). Our framework introduces new algorithms
for both ciphertext-plaintext and ciphertext-ciphertext multiplication, as well as
an efficient ciphertext-plaintext dot product. We utilize Circuit Bootstrapping
(CBS) to refresh ciphertexts, which ensures composability for the proposed op-
erations. Furthermore, our approach features novel parallelization strategies and
utilizes the batched CBS to maximize throughput and efficiency. Our experimen-
tal evaluation on selected benchmarks demonstrates significant speedups ranging
from 1.10× to 3.46× compared to the baseline tfhe-rs implementation and the
current state-of-the-art in [22]. Overall, our work establishes a new foundation
for high-performance arithmetic in TFHE.
16