1
Topology-Driven Symbolic Verification of
Post-Quantum Migration Paths Using Tamarin
Prover
Vishnu Ajith, Muhammed Ibrahim, and Muhammed Sihan Haroon
Abstract—The transition from classical public-key cryptog-
raphy to post-quantum cryptography introduces protocol-level
risks that are not fully addressed by configuration review, per-
formance benchmarking, or endpoint reachability testing. Under
the current abstraction, deployments may appear operationally
correct while still permitting secrecy, authentication, or forward-
secrecy violations at the protocol level. This paper presents a
topology-driven symbolic verification workflow that translates
distributed-system communication graphs into Tamarin mod-
els for analysis under the Dolev–Yao adversary model. The
workflow derives protocol roles, communication constraints, and
migration policies from a graph-based deployment represen-
tation, producing .spthy models and associated lemmas for
executability, secrecy, authentication, and forward secrecy. A
canonical topology representation is used to ensure deterministic
model generation from semantically equivalent graph inputs.
Experimental evaluation across five scenarios indicates that the
framework produces discriminative symbolic outcomes rather
than uniform failure reports. A registration-only control scenario
verifies all reported lemmas, while the remaining scenarios
exhibit two distinct falsification patterns: secrecy and forward-
secrecy failures in three scenarios, and authentication failure in
one scenario. These results indicate that symbolic verification
provides a complementary assurance layer for post-quantum
migration analysis and can reveal protocol-level risks that are
not observable through operational testing alone.
Index Terms—Post-Quantum Cryptography, Tamarin Prover,
Symbolic Verification, Security Protocols, Distributed Systems,
Forward Secrecy, Authentication, Graph-Based Modeling.
I. INTRODUCTION
Post-quantum migration is no longer only an algorithm-
selection problem; it is also a protocol-correctness problem.
The standardization of ML-KEM, ML-DSA, and SLH-DSA by
NIST has accelerated adoption efforts across distributed sys-
tems, service meshes, gateways, and application-layer security
protocols [1]–[5]. However, replacing or augmenting classical
primitives does not by itself guarantee that the surrounding
protocol logic remains secure.
A recurring difficulty is that migration decisions are made
at multiple layers simultaneously: key-exchange policy, certifi-
cate handling, fallback behavior, gateway mediation, and end-
point capability constraints. A system may therefore satisfy op-
erational expectations—for example, endpoints are reachable
and cryptographic primitives execute successfully—while still
violating deeper security properties such as forward secrecy
V. Ajith, M. Ibrahim, and M. S. Haroon are Lecturers in Computing at
Ulster University (via QA Higher Education), UK. V. Ajith is also an R&D
Engineer at Quentangle Quantum Systems, UK.
or peer authentication. This distinction is especially important
in transitional hybrid deployments, where classical and post-
quantum mechanisms may coexist.
Symbolic verification provides a rigorous way to rea-
son about such protocol behaviors. The Tamarin Prover has
been successfully applied to TLS 1.3, 5G authentication, the
Noise framework, EMV payment protocols, and recent post-
quantum-secure messaging designs [6]–[12]. Yet, in practice,
symbolic analysis is often performed manually on standalone
models detached from actual deployment structure. This cre-
ates a modeling gap between system topology and formal
protocol reasoning.
This paper focuses specifically on topology-conditioned
symbolic checking for post-quantum migration scenarios. The
central idea is to represent a distributed deployment as a
directed graph, derive a canonical symbolic model from that
graph, and use Tamarin to check whether the migration path
preserves key security properties under an active adversary.
The aim is not to symbolically model the internal mathemat-
ics of ML-KEM or ML-DSA. Instead, the workflow checks
protocol-level consequences of deployment policy, topology,
and mixed migration states.
The contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We define a topology-driven method for generat-
ing Tamarin models from distributed-system migration
graphs.
2) We formalize a compact graph semantics for migration-
aware protocol checking, including endpoint capability
and channel policy constraints.
3) We introduce a canonical topology representation en-
abling deterministic symbolic model generation from
semantically equivalent graph inputs.
4) We report per-scenario symbolic outcomes together with
executability checks so that meaningful verification can
be distinguished from aggregate verdicts.
5) We experimentally show that protocol-level vulnerabil-
ities can be exposed even when deployment posture
appears stronger under runtime or policy-level interpre-
tation.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related work. Section III presents the system
model. Section IV describes the Tamarin-based methodology.
Section V reports results. Section VI discusses limitations.
Section VII concludes.

2
II. RELATED WORK
A. Symbolic Verification of Security Protocols
The Tamarin Prover is a mature framework for the symbolic
analysis of security protocols under an adversary with full
network control [6], [7]. It has been used to verify major
real-world protocols, including TLS 1.3 [8], [9], 5G authen-
tication [10], the Noise framework [11], and EMV payment
protocols [12]. These studies show that symbolic methods can
reveal subtle attack traces that are invisible to conventional
testing. Recent work has also examined the ProVerif tool as
a complementary framework for automated symbolic analy-
sis [16], and formal verification has been applied to post-
quantum secure channel protocols [17].
B. Post-Quantum Protocol Assurance
Recent research has expanded from post-quantum algorithm
design to deployment assurance. NIST standardized ML-KEM,
ML-DSA, and SLH-DSA in 2024 [3]–[5], and prior work has
benchmarked post-quantum key exchange and signatures in
TLS and related protocols [13]. Machine-checked verification
of Kyber-family implementations has further demonstrated the
importance of high-assurance validation beyond benchmark-
driven evaluation [14]. Hybrid key exchange combining clas-
sical and post-quantum primitives has been formally analyzed
as a migration strategy [18]. However, most existing work
either focuses on primitive correctness or protocol verification
in isolation. Less attention has been given to automatically de-
riving symbolic protocol models from distributed deployment
structure during post-quantum migration.
C. Graph-Based and Topology-Aware Security Analysis
Graph-based representations of distributed systems have
been used in network security analysis and attack graph
research [19], [20]. However, the use of deployment topology
graphs as the direct source for generating symbolic protocol
models remains largely unexplored, particularly in the PQC
migration context. Our work bridges this gap by deriving
Tamarin specifications directly from annotated communication
graphs.
D. Gap Addressed in This Paper
The gap addressed here is not the design of a new crypto-
graphic primitive, but the formal checking of migration behav-
ior in a system topology. Our focus is a workflow that links
deployment graphs to Tamarin models and evaluates whether
migration posture, channel policy, and capability asymmetry
introduce protocol-level risk.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
We model a distributed deployment as a directed graph
G = (V, E),
(1)
where V is the set of nodes and E ⊆V × V is the set of
directed communication edges.
A. Node Semantics
Each node v ∈V is associated with an attribute tuple
α(v) = (ρv, ηv, κv, σv),
(2)
where ρv denotes the functional role (e.g., client, server,
gateway), ηv denotes the endpoint identifier, κv ∈{0, 1}
indicates whether the node is configured to support post-
quantum cryptography, and σv ∈{0, 1} indicates whether
strict PQ-only operation is enforced.
B. Edge Policy Semantics
Each edge e = (u, v) ∈E carries a communication policy
π(e) ∈{classical, hybrid, pqc_only}.
(3)
This policy constrains how the channel should be modeled and
what forms of fallback are admissible.
C. Security Goals
For a generated symbolic model M(G), the main property
classes considered in this paper are executability, secrecy,
authentication, and forward secrecy. At a conceptual level,
these correspond to the following security intentions:
Secrecy: session data should not become derivable
by the adversary.
Authentication: a completed receive event should
correspond to a prior matching send event.
Forward Secrecy: later compromise should not re-
veal previously established protected data.
These expressions are schematic and are included only to
summarize the intended security goals. The concrete Tamarin
lemmas used in the implementation are generated from sce-
nario structure and may also include executability sanity lem-
mas and auxiliary policy-consistency lemmas when supported
by the scenario.
D. Canonical Representation
To ensure stable symbolic model generation, the input
topology is transformed into a canonical representation:
C(G) = Norm(V, E, α, π, ω),
(4)
where ω denotes relevant observed wire-evidence fields. Se-
mantically equivalent topologies should therefore produce the
same normalized representation even when incidental ordering
differs in the source input.
IV. TOPOLOGY-DRIVEN TAMARIN METHODOLOGY
A. Overview
The proposed workflow maps a deployment graph into a
Tamarin model in three steps:
1) Canonicalize the graph and extract role and channel
semantics.
2) Generate a symbolic protocol model and associated
lemmas.
3) Execute Tamarin and classify the resulting per-lemma
outcomes.

3
Topology graph
G = (V, E)
Canonical
representation
Generate
.spthy
Define
lemmas
Run
Tamarin
Classify
outcome
Fig. 1: Topology-driven symbolic checking workflow. A de-
ployment graph is transformed into a canonical representation,
translated into a Tamarin model and lemma set, and checked
under symbolic adversary assumptions.
B. Graph-to-Model Translation
Each graph edge induces a communication relation be-
tween protocol roles. Nodes identified as gateways or policy-
enforcement points introduce mediation rules into the sym-
bolic model. Strict PQ-only nodes prohibit classical fallback
transitions, while hybrid nodes admit controlled coexistence
of classical and post-quantum behavior.
The generated .spthy model includes:
• protocol rules representing initiator and responder mes-
sage flow,
• facts encoding node capabilities, edge configuration, and
observed wire posture,
• restrictions corresponding to permitted or forbidden fall-
back behavior,
• sanity lemmas for executability,
• primary security lemmas for secrecy, authentication, and
forward secrecy,
• auxiliary policy-consistency lemmas when the scenario
structure supports them.
C. Adversary Model
We adopt the standard Dolev–Yao adversary model [15].
The adversary has complete control over the communication
network and may intercept, replay, modify, block, and inject
messages arbitrarily. Cryptographic primitives are assumed
perfect at the symbolic level; attacks therefore arise from
protocol structure, trust assumptions, and migration policy
logic rather than computational cryptanalysis.
Input
graph
Canonical
form
Generate
.spthy
Define
lemmas
Run
Tamarin
Parse
results
Return
verdict
Fig. 2: Execution pipeline for topology-driven symbolic veri-
fication. The deployment graph is normalized, translated into
a symbolic model, checked in Tamarin, and parsed into per-
lemma outcomes.
D. Generated Model Example
To make the generation process concrete, Listing 1 shows
an excerpt from a generated PQC-only channel model. The
excerpt preserves the actual identifiers emitted by the generator
for edge configuration, observed wire posture, message trans-
mission, delivery, and authenticated-flow executability. Ellipsis
markers (...) in the Receive rule denote fields abbreviated
for space; the full rule is emitted without truncation by the
generator.
The example demonstrates that the graph-to-model trans-
lation does not stop at node metadata: it also materializes
channel policy, observed wire posture, symbolic send/receive
rules, and executability conditions.
E. Why This Matters for PQ Migration
Post-quantum migration is typically incremental rather than
instantaneous. As a result, systems often move through in-
termediate hybrid states that are vulnerable to policy in-
consistency, fallback ambiguity, and hidden attack surfaces.
The proposed method enables these transitional states to be
checked formally at the topology level rather than only at the
primitive or endpoint level.

4
Listing 1: Excerpt from a generated PQC-only channel model
(fields abbreviated with ... are emitted in full by the gener-
ator).
rule Channel_client_service_0_Policy:
[ ]
--[ EdgeConfigured(’client__service_1’,
’client’,’service’,’pqc_only’),
EdgeRolePath(’client__service_1’,
’server’,’server’),
ObservedWireState(’client__service_1’,
’PQC_ONLY’) ]->
[ !EdgeReady(’client__service_1’) ]
rule Channel_client_service_0_Send:
let payload_0 = <˜tok_0, ˜data_0>
ct_0
= aenc(payload_0, sessPk_0)
sig_0 = sign(<’client__service_1’,
’pqc_only’,ct_0,
’client’,’service’,˜tok_0>,
ltkS_0)
in
[ !EdgeReady(’client__service_1’),
!Ltk(’client’,ltkS_0),
!SessionPk(’client__service_1’,sessPk_0),
Fr(˜data_0), Fr(˜tok_0) ]
--[ PQCTransmit(’client’,’service’,˜data_0),
Secret(˜data_0),
TokenUsed(˜tok_0),
Running(’client’,’service’,˜data_0) ]->
[ PendingToken(’client__service_1’,˜tok_0),
Out(<’pqc_only’,’client__service_1’,
ct_0,sig_0,˜tok_0>) ]
rule Channel_client_service_0_Receive:
[ !SessionSk(’client__service_1’,sessSk_0),
PendingToken(’client__service_1’,tok_0),
In(<’pqc_only’,’client__service_1’,
aenc(<tok_0,data_0>,pk(sessSk_0)),
sign(<’client__service_1’,’pqc_only’,
aenc(<tok_0,data_0>,pk(sessSk_0)),
’client’,’service’,tok_0>,
ltkS_0),
tok_0>) ]
--[ Delivered(’client__service_1’,
’client’,’service’,data_0),
AcceptedToken(’client__service_1’,tok_0),
Commit(’service’,’client’,data_0) ]->
[ !EdgeReady(’client__service_1’) ]
lemma sanity_authenticated_flow_executable:
exists-trace
"Ex a b data #i #j.
Running(a,b,data) @ #i &
Commit(b,a,data) @ #j & #i < #j"
V. RESULTS
This section evaluates the effectiveness of the topology-
driven symbolic verification workflow in detecting protocol-
level vulnerabilities during post-quantum migration. The eval-
uation focuses on five scenarios: one sanity-control case and
four migration-path cases with distinct topology and policy
characteristics.
A. Experimental Setup
A prototype implementation was used to generate Tamarin
models from distributed communication topologies and ex-
ecute symbolic verification under the Dolev–Yao adversary
model. Experiments were conducted through a scenario har-
TABLE I: Scenario Roles in the Evaluation
Scenario
Role in Evaluation
S0
Registration-only control for model gen-
eration and executability; no security
trace exported
S1
Classical direct path used to examine
baseline symbolic failure modes
S2
Mixed-capability strict-PQC path used
to test asymmetry under stricter policy
assumptions
S3
Gateway-mediated path used to test se-
crecy and forward-secrecy behavior un-
der mediation
S4
Stronger PQC multi-hop path used to
test whether stronger posture necessar-
ily preserves authentication
TABLE II: Per-Scenario Symbolic Lemma Outcomes
Scen.
Name
Exec. Sec.
Auth. FS
Overall
S0
Reg.-only control
✓
✓
✓
✓
VERIFIED
S1
Classical direct
✓
×
✓
×
FALSIFIED
S2
Asym. strict PQC
✓
×
✓
×
FALSIFIED
S3
Classical via PQC GW
✓
×
✓
×
FALSIFIED
S4
PQC multi-hop
✓
✓
×
✓
FALSIFIED
✓= verified;
× = falsified
ness that exports machine-readable results, per-scenario sum-
maries, and trace metadata where available. Each scenario was
executed five times; median wall-clock latency is reported.
The evaluated scenarios are:
1) S0 – Registration-Only Positive Control: a control
scenario intended to confirm model generation and basic
executability.
2) S1 – Classical Direct Path: a direct classical commu-
nication path used to examine baseline symbolic failure
modes.
3) S2 – Asymmetric Strict PQC: a mixed-capability
configuration with stricter post-quantum enforcement
assumptions.
4) S3 – Classical via PQC Gateway: classical endpoints
communicating through an intermediate PQC-capable
gateway.
5) S4 – PQC Multi-Hop Path: a stronger multi-hop PQC
path used to test whether stronger posture preserves
authentication.
Table I summarizes the role of each scenario.
B. Per-Scenario Lemma Matrix
The most important result is that the framework does not
behave as a uniform failure detector. Table II reports the
per-scenario, per-lemma outcomes. Executability is verified in
all scenarios, while the security outcomes separate into two
distinct patterns.
As shown in Table II, the results split into two distinct
falsification patterns. In S1–S3, secrecy and forward secrecy
fail while authentication remains verified. In S4, secrecy-
related properties remain verified while authentication fails.
The practical implication is that stronger deployment posture

5
TABLE III: Runtime Assessment Versus Symbolic Verification
Scenario
Runtime (Status)
Symbolic Outcome
S0
PASS
All lemmas verified
S1
PASS
Secrecy and FS falsified
S2
PASS
Secrecy and FS falsified
S3
PASS
Secrecy and FS falsified
S4
PASS
Authentication falsified
TABLE IV: Median Verification Latency Across Five Re-
peated Runs
Scenario
Median Latency (ms)
S1
174.069
S2
169.519
S3
317.826
S4
1328.424
does not monotonically translate into stronger symbolic guar-
antees.
C. Interpretation of the Verified Control
S0 verifies all reported lemmas and therefore serves as
a positive control for model generation and basic symbolic
executability. At the same time, its security interpretation
should remain cautious because it is structurally simpler than
the message-carrying scenarios. Its main value is to show that
the framework does not simply falsify every input.
D. Runtime Posture Versus Symbolic Outcome
A central result of the evaluation is that deployment posture
does not reliably predict symbolic security outcome. Table III
summarizes this divergence across all five scenarios.
The three scenarios S1–S3 all falsify secrecy and forward
secrecy, despite differing in communication assumptions and
migration posture. By contrast, S4 preserves secrecy and
forward secrecy while falsifying authentication. This shows
that symbolic analysis is not merely rephrasing deployment
labels. Instead, it exposes topology-dependent failure modes
that operational posture alone cannot distinguish.
E. Verification Latency
The scenario harness executed five repeated prover runs
per scenario and recorded wall-clock timing data for the four
migration scenarios S1–S4. Median wall-clock latency across
those repeated runs is reported in Table IV. For completeness,
harness-native first-run timings were S1: 279 ms, S2: 179 ms,
S3: 375 ms, and S4: 1613 ms.
The results show a clear separation between the simpler sce-
narios and the more expensive multi-hop case. The large gap
between S4 and the other scenarios is consistent with gateway-
mediated topologies inducing more complex symbolic search
behavior than two- and three-node cases.
Fig. 3: Verification latency across the primary migration
scenarios (five runs each). The S4 case is materially more
expensive than the simpler scenarios.
Fig. 4: Verified and falsified lemma outcomes by scenario. The
framework produces differentiated results rather than uniform
acceptance or rejection.
F. Lemma Outcomes by Scenario
Figure 4 visualizes the distribution of verified and falsified
outcomes across scenarios, complementing Table II. Only
these two outcome categories were observed across all evalu-
ated scenarios.
G. Partial Trace Support
The current implementation exports more than a binary
trace flag. For falsified lemmas, the per-lemma records include
traceAvailable together with raw trace excerpts, action
labels, involved entities, heuristic hints, and parser-confidence
notes where extraction succeeds. This remains partial rather
than full Tamarin counterexample reconstruction, so the pa-
per treats trace support conservatively. In particular, a Trace
Available indicator in Table II would denote that at least
one falsified lemma in that scenario produced exported trace
metadata; it should not be interpreted as full structured attack-
trace recovery.
H. Summary of Findings
The results support four conclusions:
1) The framework produces discriminative symbolic out-
comes rather than uniform failure reports.

6
2) Executability is verified in all evaluated scenarios, in-
dicating that the generated models are symbolically
runnable.
3) Secrecy and forward secrecy fail together in S1–S3,
whereas S4 exhibits a different failure mode in which
authentication is falsified while secrecy-related proper-
ties remain verified.
4) Deployment posture alone does not determine symbolic
success; different migration topologies fail in different
ways.
VI. LIMITATIONS
The method has several limitations. First, symbolic guar-
antees depend on the fidelity of the generated model. If an
important deployment behavior is omitted during graph-to-
model translation, the resulting outcome may not reflect the
true system.
Second, the current workflow checks protocol-level sym-
bolic properties rather than computational soundness or
implementation-level
side
channels.
Thus,
a
successful
lemma outcome should not be interpreted as a complete
implementation-security guarantee.
Third, the present abstraction is policy-level rather than
cryptographic-primitive-level. The implementation does not
symbolically model the internal mathematics of ML-KEM,
ML-DSA, or SLH-DSA. Instead, it checks how migration pos-
ture, channel policy, and topology affect protocol properties.
Fourth, although the implementation now exports partial
structured trace metadata, it does not yet provide full attack-
trace reconstruction suitable for detailed counterexample nar-
ration.
Finally, the current evaluation remains compact. Broader
scenario families, stronger negative controls, and richer timing
studies would further improve empirical coverage.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a topology-driven workflow for sym-
bolic verification of post-quantum migration paths using the
Tamarin Prover. The approach translates distributed communi-
cation graphs into Tamarin models, checks executability and
security properties under an active adversary, and evaluates
the results across a verified control and four representative
migration scenarios. The current implementation supports de-
terministic model generation, per-scenario outcome reporting,
and partial trace export, enabling a more evidence-based
characterization of symbolic outcomes than aggregate-only
reporting. The experimental findings show that deployment
posture alone does not determine symbolic success and that
meaningful positive and negative cases can be distinguished
under the current abstraction. These results support the use
of symbolic checking as a complementary assurance layer for
post-quantum migration analysis.